BENAZIR
BHUTTO
An
Autobiography

DAUGHTER
OF
DESTINY
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

2

PREFACE

I have always believed in the importance of historic record. When the
government of my father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was overthrown in 1977, I
encouraged many of those who had worked closely with him to write about the
Bhutto period. But in the difficult years of Martial Law that followed in Pakistan,
many from my father's government were busy fighting the persecution and the
false cases brought against them by the military regime. Others had fled into
exile, and had no access to their personal papers. My own involvement in the
struggle to return democracy to Pakistan, and the years I consequently spent
imprisoned without charge, made it impossible for me to write a book on my
father's government myself.
More than a million of my countrymen came out to greet me when I
returned to Pakistan from two years of exile in April 1986, catapulting me into the
glare of international publicity. Suddenly I received several offers to write not my
father's story, but my own. I hesitated. It was one matter to write about my father,
who had become the democratically elected prime minister of Pakistan and had
lasting achievements to his name, and quite another to write about myself,
whose most important political battles were still to be fought. It seemed
presumptuous. I thought autobiographies were written in the autumn of one's life,
looking back.
A friend's chance remark changed my mind. "What is not recorded is not
remembered," she told me. I saw her point. Like many in Pakistan, I had
experienced the dark years of Martial Law. Unlike many, I had the opportunity to
put those experiences on record. It is important that the world remember the
repression we in Pakistan had to bear following General Zia's coup d'etat.
Writing the book has been difficult. It has meant reliving the pain of the
past. But it has also been cathartic, forcing me for the first time to come to terms
with memories I had been trying to escape.
This is my story, events as I saw them, felt them, reacted to them. It is not
an in-depth study of Pakistan, but a glance into the transformation of a society
from democracy to dictatorship. Let it also be a call for freedom.
Benazir Bhutto
June 1988
Karachi, Pakistan
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

3

April 4, 1979

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

4

1
THE ASSASSI ATIO
OF MY FATHER

They killed my father in the early morning hours of April 4, 1979, inside
Rawalpindi District Jail. Imprisoned with my mother a few miles away in a
deserted police training camp at Sihala, I felt the moment of my father's death.
Despite the Valiums my mother had given me to try to get through the agonizing
night, I suddenly sat bolt-upright in bed at 2 A.M. "No!" the scream burst through
the knots in my throat. "No!" I couldn't breathe, didn't want to breathe. Papa!
Papa! I felt cold, so cold, in spite of the heat, and couldn't stop shaking. There
was nothing my mother and I could say to console each other. Somehow the
hours passed as we huddled together in the bare police quarters. We were ready
at dawn to accompany my father's body to our ancestral family graveyard.
"I am in Iddat and can't receive outsiders. You talk to him," my mother said
dully when the jailer arrived, as she began a widow's four months and ten days of
seclusion from strangers.
I walked into the cracked cement-floored front room that was supposed to
serve as our sitting room. It stank of mildew and rot.
"We are ready to leave with the prime minister," I told the junior jailor standing
nervously before me.
"They have already taken him to be buried," he said.
I felt as if he had struck me. "Without his family?" I asked bitterly. "Even
the criminals in the military regime know that it is our family's religious obligation
to accompany his body, to recite the prayers for the dead, to see his face before
burial. We applied to the jail superintendent ..."
"They have taken him," he interrupted.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

5

"Taken him where?" The jailer was silent.
"It was very peaceful," he finally replied. "I have brought what was left."
He handed me the pitiful items from my father's death cell one by one: my
father's shalwar khameez, the long shirt and loose trousers he'd worn to the end,
refusing as a political prisoner to wear the uniform of a condemned criminal; the
tiffin box for food that for the last ten days he had refused; the roll of bedding
they had allowed him only after the broken wires of his cot had lacerated his
back; his drinking cup . . .
"Where is his ring?" I managed to ask the jailer.
"Did he have a ring?" he asked.
I watched him make a great show of fishing through his bag, through his
pockets. Finally he handed me my father's ring, which toward the end had
regularly slipped off his emaciated fingers.
"Peaceful. It was very peaceful," he kept muttering. How could a hanging
be peaceful?
Basheer and Ibrahim, our family bearers who brought us supplies every
day because the authorities did not provide us with food, came into the room.
Basheer's face went white when he recognized my father's clothes.
"Ya Allah! Ya Allah! They've killed Sahib! They've killed him!" he
screamed. Before we could stop him, Basheer grabbed a can of petrol and
doused himself with it, preparing to set himself aflame. My mother had to rush
out to prevent his self-immolation.
I stood in a daze, not believing what had happened to my father, not
wanting to. It was just not possible that Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the first prime minister
of Pakistan to be elected directly by the people, was dead. Where there had
been repression under the generals who had ruled Pakistan since its birth in
1947, my father had been the first to bring democracy. Where the people had
lived as they had for centuries at the mercy of their tribal chiefs and landlords, he
had installed Pakistan's first Constitution to guarantee legal protection and civil
rights. Where the people had had to resort to violence and bloodshed to unseat
the generals, he had guaranteed a parliamentary system of civilian government
and elections every five years.
No. It was not possible. "Jiye Bhutto! Long live Bhutto!" millions had
cheered when he became the first politician ever to visit the most forlorn and
remote villages of Pakistan. When his Pakistan People's Party was voted into
office, my father had started his modernization programs, redistributing the land
held for generations by the feudal few among the many poor, educating the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

6

millions held down by ignorance, nationalizing the country's major industries,
guaranteeing minimum wages and job security, and forbidding discrimination
against women and minorities. The six years of his government had brought light
to a country steeped in stagnant darkness—until the dawn of July 5, 1977.
Zia ul-Haq. My father's supposedly loyal army chief of staff. The general
who had sent his soldiers in the middle of the night to overthrow my father and
take over the country by force. Zia ul-Haq, the military dictator who had
subsequently failed to crush my father's following in spite of all his guns and tear
gas and Martial Law regulations, who had failed to break my father's spirit
despite his isolation in a death cell. Zia ul-Haq, the desperate general who had
just sent my father to his death.
I stood numbly in front of the junior jailer, holding the small bundle that
was all that was left of my father. The scent of his cologne was still on his
clothes, the scent of Shalimar. I hugged his shalwar to me, suddenly
remembering Kathleen Kennedy, who had worn her father's parka at Radcliffe
long after the senator had been killed. Our two families had always been
compared in terms of politics. Now, we had a new and dreadful bond. That night
and for many others, I, too, tried to keep my father near me by sleeping with his
shirt under my pillow.
I felt completely empty, that my life had shattered. For almost two years, I
had done nothing but fight the trumped-up charges brought against my father by
Zia's military regime and work with the Pakistan People's Party toward the
elections Zia had promised at the time of the coup, then had canceled in the face
of our impending victory. I had been arrested six times by the military regime and
been repeatedly forbidden by the Martial Law authorities to set foot in Karachi
and Lahore. So had my mother. As acting chairperson of the PPP during my
father's imprisonment, she had been detained eight times. We had spent the last
six weeks under detention in Sihala, the six months before that under detention
in Rawalpindi. Yet not until yesterday had I allowed myself to believe that
General Zia would actually assassinate my father.
Who would break the news to my younger brothers, who were fighting my
father's death sentence from political exile in London? And who would tell my
sister, Sanam, who was just finishing her final year at Harvard? I was especially
worried about Sanam. She had never been political. Yet she had been dragged
into the tragedy with all of us. Was she alone now? I prayed she wouldn't do
anything foolish.
I felt as if my body were being torn apart. How could I go on? In spite of
our efforts, we had failed to keep my father alive. I felt so alone. I just felt so
alone. "What will I do without you to help me?" I had asked him in his death cell.
I needed his political advice. For all that I held degrees in government from
Harvard and Oxford, I was not a politician. But what could he say? He had
shrugged helplessly.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

7

I had seen my father for the last time yesterday. The pain of that meeting
was close to unbearable. No one had told him he was to be executed early the
next morning. No one had told the world leaders who had officially asked the
military regime for clemency, among them U.S. president Jimmy Carter, British
prime minister Margaret Thatcher, Leonid Brezhnev of the Soviet Union, Pope
John Paul II, Indira Gandhi, and many others from the entire Muslim spectrum,
Saudi Arabia, the Emirates, Syria. Certainly none of the cowards in Zia's regime
had announced the date of my father's execution to the country, fearing the
people's reaction to their prime minister's murder. Only my mother and I knew.
And that, by accident and deduction.
I had been lying on my army cot in the early morning of April 2nd when my
mother had come suddenly into the room. "Pinkie," she said, calling me by my
family nickname, but in a tone that immediately made my body go rigid. "There
are army officers outside saying that both of us should go to see your father
today. What does that mean?"
I knew exactly what it meant. So did she. But neither of us could bear to
admit it. This was my mother's visiting day, allowed her once a week. Mine was
scheduled for later in the week. That they wanted both of us to go could only
mean that this was to be the last visit. Zia was about to kill my father.
My mind raced. We had to get the word out, to send a last call to the
international community and to the people. Time had run out. "Tell them I'm not
well," I said to my mother hastily. "Say that if it is the last meeting then, of course,
I will come, but if it is not, we will go tomorrow." While my mother went to speak
with the guards, I quickly broke open a message I had already wrapped to send
out with Ibrahim and wrote a new one. "I think they are calling us for our last
meeting," I scribbled furiously to a friend on the outside, hoping she would alert
the party's leaders, who in turn would inform the diplomatic corps and mobilize
the people. The people were our last hope.
"Take this immediately to Yasmin," I told Ibrahim, knowing we were taking
a great risk. There wasn't time for him to wait for a sympathetic or lackadaisical
guard to come on duty. He could be searched and followed. He wouldn't be able
to take the normal precautions. The danger was enormous, but so were the
stakes. "Go, Ibrahim, go!" I urged him. "Tell the guards you're fetching medicine
for me!" And off he ran.
I looked outside the window to see the Martial Law contingent consulting
with each other, then transmitting the message that I was ill on their wireless set
and waiting to receive information back. In the confusion, Ibrahim reached the
gate. "I have to get medicine for Benazir Sahiba quickly. Quickly!" he said to the
guards who had overheard the talk of my ill health. Miraculously they let Ibrahim
through, barely five minutes after my mother had first come to me in the
bedroom. My hands would not stop trembling. I had no idea if the message would
be safely delivered.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

8

Outside the window, the wireless sets crackled. "Because your daughter is
not feeling well, then tomorrow will be fine for the visit," the authorities finally told
my mother. We had gained another twenty-four hours of my father's life. But
when the compound gates were sealed immediately after Ibrahim had fled, we
knew something terribly ominous was about to occur,
Fight. We had to fight. But how? I felt so powerless, locked inside the
stockade while the moments toward my father's death ticked by. Would the
message get through? Would the people rise up in spite of the guns and
bayonets they had faced since the coup? And who would lead them? Many of the
leaders of the Pakistan People's Party were in jail. So were thousands of our
supporters, including, for the first time in Pakistan's history, women. Countless
others had been teargassed and flogged just for mentioning my father's name,
the number of lashes to be administered painted on their half-naked bodies.
Would the people heed this last desperate call? Would they even hear it?
At 8:15 P.M. my mother and I tuned in the BBC Asia report on our radio.
Every muscle in my body was rigid. I sat expectantly forward as the BBC
reported that I had sent a message from prison that tomorrow, April 3rd, was to
be the last meeting with my father. The message had got through! I waited for
the BBC to announce our call for the people to rise in protest. There was none.
Instead, the BBC went on to report that there was no confirmation of the news
from the jail superintendent. "She's panicked," it quoted one of my father's
former ministers as saying. My mother and I couldn't even look at each other.
Our last hope had died.
April 3, 1979. A speeding jeep. Crowds frozen in fear behind security forces, not
knowing the fate of their prime minister. Prison gates hastily opened and closed.
My mother and I being searched again by jail matrons, first leaving our own
prison in Sihala, then again when we arrived at the jail in Rawalpindi.
"Why are you both here?" my father says from inside the inferno of his
cell. My mother doesn't answer.
"Is this the last meeting?" he asks.
My mother cannot bear to answer. "I think so," I say.
He calls for the jail superintendent who is standing nearby. They never
leave us alone with Papa.
"Is this the last meeting?" my father asks him.
"Yes," comes the reply. The jail superintendent seems ashamed to be the
bearer of the regime's plans.
"Has the date been fixed?"
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

9

"Tomorrow morning," the superintendent says.
"At what time?"
"At five o'clock, according to jail regulations."
"When did you receive this information?"
"Last night," he says reluctantly.
My father looks at him.
"How much time do I have with my family?"
"Half an hour."
"Under jail regulations, we are entitled to an hour," he says.
"Half an hour," the superintendent repeats. "Those are my orders."
"Make arrangements for me to have a bath and a shave," my father tells
him. "The world is beautiful and I want to leave it clean."
Half an hour. Half an hour to say goodbye to the person I love more than
any other in my life. The pain in my chest tightens into a vise. I must not cry. I
must not break down and make my father's ordeal any more difficult.
He is sitting on the floor on a mattress, the only furniture left in his cell.
They have taken away his table and his chair. They have taken away his cot.
"Take these," he says, handing me the magazines and books I had
brought him before. "I don't want them touching my things."
He hands me the few cigars his lawyers have brought him. "I'll keep one
for tonight," he says. He also keeps his bottle of Shalimar cologne.
He starts to hand me his ring, but my mother tells him to keep it on. "I'll
keep it for now, but afterwards I want it to go to Benazir," he tells her.
"I have managed to send out a message," I whisper to him as the jail
authorities strain to hear. I outline the details and he looks satisfied. She's almost
learned the ropes of politics, his expression reads.
The light inside the death cell is dim. I cannot see him clearly. Every other
visit they have allowed us to sit together inside his cell. But not today. My mother
and I squeeze together at the bars in his cell door, talking to him in whispers.
"Give my love to the other children," he says to my mother. "Tell Mir and
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

10

Sunny and Shah that I have tried to be a good father and wish I could have said
goodbye to them." She nods, but cannot speak.
"You have both suffered a lot," he says. "Now that they are going to kill me
tonight, I want to free you as well. If you want to, you can leave Pakistan while
the Constitution is suspended and Martial Law imposed. If you want peace of
mind, to pick up your lives again, then you might want to go to Europe. I give you
my permission. You can go."
Our hearts are breaking. "No, no," my mother says. "We can't go.
We'll never go. The generals must not think they have won. Zia has scheduled
elections again, though who knows if he will dare to hold them. If we leave, there
will be no one to lead the party, the party you built."
"And you. Pinkie?" my father asks.
"I could never go," I say.
He smiles. "I'm so glad. You don't know how much I love you, how much
I've always loved you. You are my jewel. You always have been."
"The time is up," the superintendent says. "The time is up."
I grip the bars.
"Please open up the cell," I ask him. "I want to say goodbye to my father."
The superintendent refuses.
"Please," I say. "My father is the elected prime minister of Pakistan. I am
his daughter. This is our last meeting. I want to hold him."
The superintendent refuses.
I try to reach my father through the bars. He is so thin, almost wasted
away from malaria, dysentery, starvation. But he pulls himself erect, and touches
my hand.
"Tonight I will be free," he says, a glow suffusing his face. "I will be joining
my mother, my father. I am going back to the land of my ancestors in Larkana to
become part of its soil, its scent, its air. There will be songs about me. I will
become part of its legend." He smiles.
"But it is very hot in Larkana."
"I'll build a shade," I manage to say.
The jail authorities move in.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

11

"Goodbye, Papa," I call to my father as my mother reaches through the
bars to touch him. We both move down the dusty courtyard. I want to look back,
but I can't. I know I can't control myself.
"Until we meet again," I hear him call.
Somehow my legs move. I cannot feel them. I have turned to stone. But
still I move. The jail authorities lead us back through the jail ward, the courtyard
filled with army tents. I move in a trance, conscious only of my head. High. I must
keep it high. They are all watching.
The car is waiting inside the locked gates so the crowds outside won't see
us. My body is so heavy I have difficulty getting in. The car speeds forward
through the gate. At its sight the crowds surge toward us but are shoved back
roughly by the security forces. I suddenly glimpse my friend Yasmin at the edge
of the crowd, waiting to deliver my father's food. "Yasmin! They are going to kill
him tonight!" I try and shout from the window. Did she hear me? Did I make any
sound at all?
Five o'clock came and went. Six o'clock. Each breath I took reminded me
of the last breaths of my father. "God, let there be a miracle," my mother and I
prayed together. "Let something happen." Even my little cat, Chun-Chun, whom I
had smuggled into detention with me, felt the tension. She had abandoned her
kittens. We couldn't find them anywhere. Yet we clung to hope.
The Supreme Court had unanimously recommended that my father's
death sentence be commuted to life imprisonment. Moreover, by Pakistani law,
the date of any execution must be announced at least a week before its
implementation. There had been no such announcement.
PPP leaders on the outside had also sent word that Zia had promised
Saudia Arabia, the Emirates, and others in confidence that he would commute
the death sentence against my father to life. But Zia's record was filled with
broken promises and disregard for the law. In the face of our persistent fears that
my father would be executed, the foreign minister of Saudi Arabia and the prime
minister of Libya had promised to fly in should a date for execution be
announced. Had they heard my message on the BBC? Was there time for them
to fly in now?
A Chinese delegation was in Islamabad. My father had pioneered
Pakistan's friendship with China. Would they sway Zia on his behalf?
My mother and I sat motionless in the white heat at Sihala, unable to
speak. Zia had also let it be known that he would entertain a plea for clemency
only from my father, or us, his immediate family. My father had forbidden it.
How do such moments pass in the countdown toward death? My mother
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

12

and I just sat. Sometimes we cried. When we lost the strength to sit up, we fell
onto the pillows on the bed. They'll snuff out his life, I kept thinking. They'll just
snuff out his life. How alone he must be feeling in that cell, with no one near him.
He didn't keep any books. He didn't keep anything. He has just that one cigar. My
throat tightened until I wanted to rip it open. But I didn't want the guards who
were always laughing and talking right outside our window to have the pleasure
of hearing me scream. "I can't bear it, Mummy, I can't," I finally broke down at
1:30. She brought me some Valium. "Try to sleep," she said.
A half hour later, in the early hours of April 4, I shot up in bed, feeling my
father's noose around my neck.
The skies rained tears of ice that night, pelting our family lands in Larkana with
hail. At our family graveyard in the nearby ancestral village of Garhi Khuda
Bakhsh Bhutto, the people were awakened by the commotion of a military
convoy. While my mother and I were passing the agonizing night in prison, my
father's body was being secretly flown to Garhi for burial. The advance party of
Martial Law administrators made their grim arrangements with Nazar
Mohammed, a villager who oversees our lands and whose family has worked
with ours for generations.
I was sleeping in my house at about 3 A.M. on 4th April when I woke to
notice strong lights of fifty to sixty military vehicles on the outskirts of the village.
At first I thought they were rehearsing again for the actions they were to take
after Mr. Bhutto was to be hanged as they had two days earlier, claiming they
were normal military exercises. The people were quite terrorized then, especially
after the police entered the Bhutto graveyard to take a careful look around.
When the police summoned me out of my house at such an early hour, all the
village folk—old, young, men and women—came out of their houses. All feared
that Mr. Bhutto had either already been hanged or was soon to be. There was
wailing and crying and desperation in their faces.
"We must arrange for the burial of Mr. Bhutto," the large number of army
and police personnel said to me at their temporary headquarters. "Show us
where the grave is to be." I was weeping. "Why should we point out the place of
burial to you?" I asked them. "We will perform the final rites by ourselves. Mr.
Bhutto belongs to us."
I asked that I be allowed to bring our people to dig the grave, fetch the
unbaked bricks to line it, cut the wooden planks to top it, and perform our
religious recitations. They permitted me only eight men to help.
While we got busy with this sad task, military and police vehicles not only
surrounded the entire village but blockaded every small street. No one from the
village could go out and no one from outside the village could enter. We were
completely cut off.
At 8

A.M.

two helicopters landed close to the village on the road where an
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

13

ambulance was waiting. I watched the coffin being transferred to the ambulance
and followed it to the graveyard. "Evacuate this house," the army colonel said to
me, pointing to the small dwelling place in the south corner of the graveyard
where the prayer leader who tends the graves lives with his wife and small
children. I protested the cruelty and inconvenience this would be to the Pesh
Imam and his family, but the colonel insisted. Twenty armed uniformed men then
took up positions on the roof with their rifles pointed into the graveyard.
Near relatives must have a last look at the face of the departed. There were
Bhutto cousins living in Garhi right next to the graveyard. Mr. Bhutto's first wife
also lived in the nearby village of Naudero, and after great argument the
authorities allowed me to fetch her. When she arrived we opened the coffin and
transferred the body onto a rope cot I had brought from my house before carrying
it into the walled home. The family lived in purdah and kept their women
protected from the eyes of strangers. No males outside the family were allowed
in. But the army people forced their way into the house against all norms of
decency.
When the body was brought out half an hour later, I asked the colonel, on oath,
if the bath in accordance with religious rules and traditional burial ceremony had
been given. He swore that it had. I checked to see if the kaffan, the unstitched
cotton shroud, had been put on the body. It was there.
We were too perturbed and grief stricken to look at the rest of the body. I'm
not sure they would have allowed it as their doings would have been
exposed. But his face was the face of a pearl. It shone like a pearl. He looked
the way he had at sixteen. His skin was not of several colors, nor did his eyes
or tongue bulge out like the pictures I'd seen of the men that Zia had hanged
in public. As ritual demands, I turned Bhutto Sahib's face to the west, toward
Mecca. His head did not fall to the side. His neck was not broken. There were
strange red and black dots on his throat, however, like an official stamp.
The colonel became very angry. Fourteen hundred to fifteen hundred people
from the village were forcing their way near the coffin and looking at the glow
from the martyr's face. Their wailing was heart rending. The colonel
threatened to baton-charge the people if they didn't leave.
"The burial must take place at once," he said. "If we have to, we will do it with
the help of the rod."
"They are mourning and heartbroken," I told him.
At gunpoint, we hurried through the last prayers for the dead and then with
ceremony befitting the departed soul, lowered the body into the grave. The
recitation of the Holy Book mingled with the wailing of the women rising from the
houses.
For days at Sihala after my father's death, I couldn't eat or drink. I would
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

14

take sips of water, but then I'd have to spit it out. I couldn't swallow at all. Nor
could I sleep. Every time I closed my eyes I had the same dream. I was standing
in front of the district jail. The gates were open. I saw a figure walking toward me.
Papa! I rushed to him. "You've come out! You've come out! I thought they had
killed you! But you're alive!" Just before I reached him, I would wake up and have
to realize once again that he was gone.
"You must eat, Pinkie, you must," my mother said, bringing me some
soup. "You will need all your strength when we get out of here to prepare for the
elections. If you want to keep fighting for your father's principles, to fight the way
he fought, then eat. You must." And I ate a little.
I forced myself to read messages of condolence that were slipped in to us.
"My dear Auntie and Benazir," wrote a family friend from Lahore on April 5th . "I
have no words to describe my sorrow and grief. The whole nation is responsible
to you for what has happened. We are all culprits. . . . Every Pakistani is sad,
demoralized and insecure. We are all guilty and burdened with sin."
On the same day, ten thousand people gathered in Rawalpindi on Liaquat
Bagh Common, where a year and a half before my mother had drawn huge
crowds, standing in for my imprisoned father in the first election campaign.
Seeing the overwhelming popularity of the PPP, Zia had canceled the elections
and sentenced my father to death. Now, while offering funeral prayers and
eulogies for my father, his followers were once again teargassed by the police.
The people ran, hurling bricks and stones at the police, who moved in with
batons and started making arrests. Yasmin, her two sisters, and her mother
attended the prayer meeting. So did Amina Piracha, a friend who had helped the
lawyers working on my father's Supreme Court case, Amina's two sisters, her
nieces, and their seventy-year-old ayah. All ten women were arrested, along with
hundreds of others, and imprisoned for two weeks.
Rumors quickly began to circulate about my father's death. The hangman had
gone mad. The pilot who had flown my father's body to Garhi had become so
agitated when he'd learned the identity of his cargo that he'd had to land his
plane and have another pilot called in. The papers were full of other lurid details
about my father's end. He had been tortured almost to death and, with only the
barest flicker of a pulse, had been carried on a stretcher to his hanging, ran one
widely believed version.
The other persistent report claimed that my father had died during a fight in his
cell. Military officers, this version claimed, had tried to force him to sign a
"confession" that he had orchestrated the coup himself and invited Zia to take
over the country. My father had refused to sign the lies the regime needed to give
it legitimacy.
In this version one of the officers had pushed my father. He had fallen, striking
his head on the wall of his cell, and had never regained consciousness. A doctor
had been summoned to revive him, giving him a heart massage and a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

15

tracheotomy, which would explain the marks Nazar Mohammed had seen on his
neck. But it had been to no avail.
I tended to believe this story. Why else had my father's body shown no
physical signs of a hanging? Why else had I awakened at 2 A.M., a full three
hours before his scheduled execution? Another political prisoner, General Babar,
told me he, too, had awakened in a sudden chill at two o'clock. So did other
friends and political supporters scattered around the world. It was as if my
father's soul was passing around among those who had loved him. And the
rumors persisted.
"Exhume the body and order a postmortem," my father's cousin and then
People's Party leader Mumtaz Bhutto urged me during a condolence call at
Sihala. "It could be to our political advantage." Political advantage? My father
was dead. Exhuming his body was not going to bring him back to life.
"They did not let him live in his death cell even before they killed him," I told
Uncle Mumtaz. "Now he's free. Let him rest in peace."
"You don't understand what historical importance this could have," Uncle
Mumtaz persisted.
I shook my head. "History will judge him on his life. The details of his death do
not matter," I said. "I will not have him exhumed. He needs his rest."
My mother's niece, Fakhri, was permitted to come to Sihala to condole with us,
as was my childhood friend, Samiya Waheed. They were relieved to find that
although we were grief stricken, we had not fallen apart. "We had heard you were
so depressed you were going to commit suicide," said Samiya, recounting
another rumor the regime was spreading.
Fakhri, who is quite emotional, rushed to embrace my mother, consoling her in
Persian. "Nusrat joon, I wish I had died. I wish I had never seen this day," she
cried. "People are saying hanging is too good for Zia."
Fakhri hugged me, too. She had been the one to bring me the news of my
father's death sentence a year before, slipping through the police guard at our
house in Karachi where I was being held in detention. I had been sitting in the
living room when she suddenly burst through the front door and prostrated
herself in the entrance hall, howling in grief and hitting her forehead on the floor.
Within half an hour the military authorities had brought a detention order for
Fakhri as well, a woman who didn't have a political bone in her body but who
spent her days playing mah-jongg and bridge. She had been imprisoned with me
for the next week, unable to return to her husband and small children.
Now we wept together. Hundreds of people, she told us, factory workers, taxi
drivers, street peddlers, were gathering in our garden in Karachi in preparation
for the soyem, our religious ceremony on the third day following death. Every
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

16

night for weeks before, women had come to the house by the busload to pray for
my father through the night, holding their Holy Qurans over their heads.
The uniforms of the army, which had always been a source of national pride,
were now the objects of derision, Fakhri also told us. On the plane from Karachi,
she and Samiya had refused to sit next to any man in army uniform. "Murderers!"
they had screamed. Everyone in the plane had lowered their heads as a mark of
respect toward those who were grieving. Nobody said a word. There were tears
in everyone's eyes.
We had applied to the authorities to visit my father's grave on the soyem,
and at 7 A.M. on April 7th we were told we had five minutes to get ready. We
didn't have black mourning clothes to wear and went in what we had brought
with us to prison. "Hurry! Hurry!" a Martial Law officer insisted as we packed into
the car to drive to the airport. They were always hurrying us, frightened that the
people would catch a glimpse of us, wave, cheer, or in any way demonstrate
their sympathy for us and by implication their antipathy for Martial Law.
But not all the military had turned into inhuman machines. At the airport,
the crew of the military plane was standing like an honor guard when we arrived,
their heads lowered. When my mother got out of the car, the crew saluted her. It
was a fitting gesture for the widow of the man who had brought over ninety
thousand of their fellow soldiers back safely from the prison camps of India. Not
everyone had forgotten. During the short flight they offered us tea, coffee, and
sandwiches, their faces showing their shock and sorrow. The crime of the few
had become the guilt of the many.
The plane didn't land at Moenjodaro, the airport nearest to Garhi Khuda
Bakhsh, but at Jacobabad an hour away. Nor did the local military authorities
choose a direct route to the village over the modern roads my father had built.
Instead our car bumped and lurched along unpaved lanes, the driver going out of
his way to avoid the possibility of our being seen through the heavily curtained
windows. We were covered in sweat and dust when we finally arrived at the
entrance to our family graveyard.
As I moved toward the narrow portal, an army officer moved with me. I
stopped. "No. You can't enter. None of you can enter," I said. "This is our
graveyard. You don't belong here."
"We are under orders not to let you out of our sight," he told me.
"I cannot permit you to come in here and violate its sanctity," I told him.
"You killed my father. You sent him here. If we mourn him now, we will mourn
him on our own."
"We have been ordered to be with you at all times," he insisted.
"Then we won't visit the grave. Take us back," my mother said, moving
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

17

toward the car. He stepped back, and we entered the walled graveyard, leaving
our shoes at the entrance as a sign of respect.
How peaceful it seemed. And how familiar. Generations of Bhuttos whose
lives had been sweeter lay there: my grandfather Sir Shah Nawaz Khan Bhutto,
former prime minister of Junagadh State, knighted by the British for his services
to the Bombay presidency before the partition of India; his wife, Lady Khurshid;
my uncle Sikander Bhutto and his legendary brother Imdad Ah, so handsome, it
was said, that when he drove his carriage down Elphinstone Street, Karachi's
main shopping area, the English ladies ran out of their shops to stare at him.
Many other relatives also lay there, in the soil which had given us birth and to
which we return when we die.
My father had brought me here just before I had left Pakistan to enter
Harvard University in 1969. "You are going far away to America," he had told me
as we stood among the graves of our forebears. "You will see many things that
amaze you and travel to places you've never heard of. But remember, whatever
happens to you, you will ultimately return here. Your place is here. Your roots are
here. The dust and mud and heat of Larkana are in your bones. And it is here
that you will be buried."
Through my tears now, I looked for his grave. I didn't even know where
they had buried him. I almost didn't recognize his grave when I saw it. It was just
a mound of mud. Raw mud sprinkled with flower petals. My mother and I sat at
the foot of the grave. I couldn't believe my father was under it. I dropped down
and kissed the part of the mud where I imagined his feet to be.
"Forgive me, Father, if I ever caused you any unhappiness," I said silently.
Alone. I felt so alone. Like all children I had taken my father for granted.
Now that I had lost him, I felt an emptiness that could never be filled. But I did not
let myself cry, believing as a Muslim that tears pull a spirit earthward and won't
let it be free.
My father had earned his freedom, had paid dearly for his peace. His
suffering had ended. "Glory be to Him who has control over all things," I read
from the Ya Sin sura of the Holy Quran. "To Him, you shall all return." My father's
soul was with God in Paradise.
Now, in the nightmare that had engulfed Pakistan, his cause had become
my own. I had felt it as I stood by my father's grave, felt the strength and
conviction of his soul replenishing me. At that moment I pledged to myself that I
would not rest until democracy returned to Pakistan, that the light of hope that he
had kindled would be kept alive. He had been the first leader of Pakistan to
speak for all the people, not just for the military and the elite. It was up to us to
continue. As my mother and I were being taken back to Sihala after my father's
soyem, soldiers were lobbing tear gas shells among the hundreds packed into
our garden at 70 Clifton to read and reread prayers for my father's soul. The
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

18

barrage of shells was so intense that the canopy over the patio was set on fire.
Clutching their Holy Qurans, the grieving people dispersed, choking.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

19

THE YEARS
OF
DETENTION
1977-1984

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

20

2
IMPRISO ED I MY
OW HOME

My mother and I were released from Sihala at the end of May 1979, seven
weeks after my father's death. We returned to 70 Clifton, our family home in
Karachi. Everything was the same. But nothing was the same. "Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto, Bar-at-Law" read the brass nameplate beside the gate to 70 Clifton.
Above it was another brass plate, faded with time, inscribed with my
grandfather's name, Sir Shah Nawaz Khan Bhutto. My grandmother built this
two-story sprawling bungalow shortly after I was born in 1953 and my brothers,
sister, and I grew up here in the cooling breezes from the Arabian Sea just a
quarter of a mile away. Who could have foreseen the tragedy and violence that
would overtake this peaceful family compound?
Every day hundreds of wailing mourners mass in the garden of coconut
palms, mangoes, and red and yellow flowering trees coaxed from the desert of
Karachi. Hundreds more wait patiently outside the gates to pay condolence calls
to their leader's family. My mother is still in Iddat and can't receive outsiders. She
sends me to greet them instead.
The familiarity of being home makes our nightmare seem even more
unreal. Two nights before my father was assassinated, the staff tell us, the army
raided 70 Clifton for the second time, searching the roof and the garden, opening
my mother's safe, rifling through the clothes in my father's closets. "Do you have
a search warrant?" one of the staff had asked, still clinging to the concept of civil
law. "I am with the search party, so there is no need for a warrant," claimed the
army officer who had come with police. For ten hours they had torn the house
apart, taking many of my personal letters from my bedroom and two black
briefcases containing bank orders and canceled checks, evidence I had collected
to refute the regime's trumped-up charges of corruption against my father.
"There are secret closets and passageways here. Show them to us!" the
army officers commanded the staff, then beat them when they said there were
none. As the search wore on, the servants were taken to the reception room and
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

21

locked in. When the milkman came early in the morning, he was locked in with
them. So was the man who came with the newspapers. The army was getting
desperate. "Sign this paper," an officer said to one of our staff. He refused.
"You've seen what happened to your Sahib," the officer threatened him. "If you
don't sign, imagine what will happen to you." The man was so frightened that he
signed.
When the search turned out to be fruitless, a truck rumbled through the
gate. The soldiers unloaded a red carpet, covered it with documents from the
truck, and then brought in the press to photograph the new "evidence" against
my father. Many assumed the regime was trying to build another case against
my father in view of the Supreme Court's unanimous recommendation to
commute the death sentence against him to life imprisonment. When the raiding
party left in the late afternoon, they took their "evidence" with them as well as
many of our personal possessions, among them my father's collection of antique
maps.
At 70 Clifton now, I make preparations to go to Larkana to pay my
respects at my father's grave. The regime learns of my plan and cancels the
scheduled flights, so I take the train. Massive crowds meet me at every station.
Where there are no stations they lie across the track, forcing the train to halt.
"Revenge! Revenge!" the crowds shout. "We must turn our grief to strength to
beat Zia at the polls," I tell them, encouraged by the huge turnout. The crowds
are the best answer to our political opponents, who have publicly declared that
"Bhutto's strength has been buried in his grave, and along with it that of the
PPP."
Back in Karachi, I meet with the PPP leaders and supporters at ten-minute
intervals from nine in the morning until nine at night. Every few hours I take a
break to greet my father's mourners in the garden. Their eyes brighten when they
see me, as well as my mother after her period of seclusion is over. The people
did not expect either of us to survive our detentions or my father's death. We
have lived a softer, more privileged life than their harsh ones. But seeing us with
their own eyes seems to fill them with new hope. As one group leaves the
garden, another enters.
At night I immerse myself in organizational matters, policy matters,
complaints, and political arrests, having summaries prepared for my mother to
read. I feel I'll never catch up and probably wouldn't have without the help of my
schoolfriend Samiya and the help of Amina and Yasmin, two young women who
had become my friends and aides during the fight to appeal my father's death
sentence. The Western press dubs Samiya, Amina, and Yasmin "Charlie's
Angels," though I'm sure the real Charlie's Angels would have quit under the
workload. One night I fall asleep with a report in my lap. The next night I move
my toothbrush and toothpaste into my study.
To calm the people before he ordered my father's death, General Zia had
again promised elections that would return the country from his military
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

22

dictatorship to civilian rule. But was he going to let the PPP win? He had publicly
declared that he would "not hand power to those he had taken it from," and that
only elections with positive results would be acceptable to him.
Zia had been in this predicament before, having scheduled elections
shortly after he overthrew my father in 1977. Faced with certain victory of the
PPP at the polls, his answer then had been to cancel the elections and arrest all
the party leaders instead. What would he do this time?
The local elections come first, in September. The PPP sweeps them. The
national elections are to come next, the elections Zia desperately needs to win to
gain legitimacy. Knowing that the rules are likely to be rigged against the PPP,
our own party officials meet at 70 Clifton to debate whether to enter the national
elections or boycott them instead. "Electoral fields should never be left open," I
argue, remembering what my father had told me. No matter how heavy the odds,
no matter how crooked the rules, always mount an opposition. And the rules are
crooked. Just as we expected, Zia changes them as soon as the PPP decision to
participate is announced.
"Register as a political party or you can't participate," the regime informs
us.
We refuse. To register is to recognize Zia's military regime.
"We'll run as independents," we counter, though we realize the loss of our
party emblem on the ballots is a great risk in a society with an official literacy rate
of 27 percent, and an actual rate closer to 8 percent.
The regime ups the stakes. "Independent candidates must secure 51
percent of the popular vote" is the new rule.
"Fine," we say. "We'll carry it."
On October 15, 1979, a month before the elections are scheduled to take
place, the PPP reconvenes at the request of some high-ranking party officials.
The question of fighting the elections is reopened, and the party splits down the
middle. "Boycott! Boycott!" several of the party officials urge my mother in the
dining room of 70 Clifton, now serving as a conference room. Some of them, I
know, have called me "a silly little girl" in private, but I speak up again. "By
continually changing the rules, Zia has lost his confidence," I argue. "We must
not lose ours. We swept the local bodies elections and we will sweep the general
election, too." It is late at night before the PPP decides by a narrow margin to
uphold the decision to contest.
When Zia hears of our intention the next day, his nerves crack. The chief
Martial Law administrator repeats the pattern of 1977, canceling the elections
altogether and once again sending his soldiers to 70 Clifton. "The house is
surrounded," one of the staff tells me in the middle of the night. Quickly I gather
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

23

all the political papers I had laboriously collected—party papers, membership
lists, letters, lists of those in jail—throw them in the bathtub, and burn them. I
don't want to make the regime's persecution easier. Minutes later the soldiers
enter the house to take my mother and me at gunpoint to Al-Murtaza, our country
home in Larkana. We will be imprisoned there for six months.
I pace the corridors of Al-Murtaza. Though this is my mother's ninth
political detention and my seventh since the coup two years ago, I still can't
adjust to the forced isolation. Each incarceration is just adding another layer of
anger. Perhaps at twenty-six, it is my age. But I don't think I would feel differently
at any age, especially being detained at Al-Murtaza.
Al-Murtaza was the heart of our family, the house to which we always
returned from the four comers of the earth to pass our winter vacations, to
celebrate Eid at the end of the holy month of Ramazan as well as my father's
birthday, to attend family weddings or pay condolences to our many relatives
living on the lands that had been in the family for hundreds of years. Now the
regime has declared Al-Murtaza a sub-jail for my mother and me.
The Western press is being told by the regime that we are under "house
arrest." But that is inaccurate. "House arrest" in Pakistan is quite informal, the
detained person being allowed visits from friends and family, press interviews,
local and long-distance telephone calls, books, and sometimes even a quick
drive or outside meetings. Under sub-jail rules, Al-Murtaza has been deemed a
prison where the Jail Manual Regulations prevail. Our telephone is disconnected.
My mother and I are confined to the compound and allowed no visitors save for
an occasional visit from my sister, Sanam.
The house both inside and outside the walls is surrounded by soldiers
from the Frontier Force, a paramilitary group of Pathan tribesmen from the
Northwest Frontier Province. In my father's time, special commandos were
posted at Al-Murtaza to keep intruders out. The Frontier Force is here now for the
sole purpose of keeping his widow and his daughter in. Zia wants the country,
even the world, to forget that there was ever a family named Bhutto.
In Pakistan, the papers hardly even mention our names. As of October 16,
1979, the day Zia canceled the second elections and arrested my mother and
me, he added to his burgeoning list of Martial Law regulations by imposing total
censorship on the press. Under Martial Law Regulation No. 49, the editor of any
publication deemed dangerous to the "sovereignty, integrity and security of
Pakistan, or morality and maintenance of public order" was now subject to ten
lashes and twenty-five years of rigorous imprisonment.
Our party newspaper, Musawaat, with a circulation of over one hundred
thousand in the city of Lahore alone, was closed down, and its presses seized.
Other newspapers were being threatened with closure or the cutoff of
government-controlled newsprint and advertising if they did not comply. For the
next six years, pictures of my father, mother, or me will rarely appear in any
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

24

newspaper. Nor will there be any favorable mention of our names. If the military
censors find any story even slightly sympathetic, they will cut it out of the galleys
each newspaper is required to submit for approval. At times, whole newspaper
columns will run blank, the journalists' method of letting the reading public know
that news worthy of being printed has been removed by the censors.
The strength of the PPP also forced Zia to tighten his already oppressive
political restrictions. Since the imposition of Martial Law in 1977, anyone
participating in political activity had been subject to imprisonment and whipping.
But as of October 16, 1979, the military regime decreed that political parties
themselves were illegal, a clear attempt to kill popular support for my father's
policies once and for all. "All political parties in Pakistan with all their groups,
branches and factions . . . shall cease to exist," General Zia's Martial Law
Regulation No. 48 stated bluntly. Any member of a political party, or anyone who
even called himself one in private conversation, was now subject to fourteen
years' rigorous imprisonment, the loss of his property, and twenty-five lashes.
From this moment on, any mention of the PPP in the press will be preceded by
the word "defunct." My mother and I are thus reduced to the "defunct" leaders of
a "defunct" party in a defunct democracy.
Photographs of my grandfather at the 1931 Indian Round Table
Conference in London hang on the walls of Al-Murtaza, as do photographs of my
father's annual birthday celebrations. So much of our family history is rooted
here. My father and his three sisters were born at Al-Murtaza, the midwife from
the nearby village of Larkana coming to the women's quarters built by my
grandfather to deliver them. Though the old house had been replaced by a more
modern one, the sense of Al-Murtaza as the true home of the Bhuttos remains.
Blue and white tiles flank the front door depicting the men and women of
Moenjodaro, a nearby ruin of a highly advanced Indus civilization dating from
2500 B.C. As a small child I thought the ancient city was called "Munj Jo Dero,"
which in Sindhi means "my place." My brothers, sister, and I took great pride that
we had been raised in the shadow of Moenjodaro, that we lived on the bank of
the Indus, which had been bringing life to the land since the beginning of time. In
no other place did we feel such continuity with the past, for our ancestors were
directly traceable to the Muslim invasion of India in A.D. 712. The diaries of one of
our ancestors, giving the family details, were washed away in a great flood in my
great-grandfather's time. But as children we were told that we were descended
either from the Rajputs, the Hindu warrior class in India which converted to Islam
at the time of the Muslim invasion, or from the conquering Arabs who entered
India through our home province of Sindh, giving it the name "The Gateway to
Islam."
Hundreds of thousands throughout India and Pakistan belonged to the
Bhutto tribe, one of the largest in Sindh, whose members ranged from farmers to
landowners. Our branch of the family was directly descended from the famous
tribal chief of the Bhuttos, Sardar Dodo Khan. Several villages in Upper Sindh—
Mirpur Bhutto, where uncle Mumtaz's family lives, Garhi Khuda Bakhsh Bhutto,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

25

where my own family graveyard is located—are named after our ancestors, who
had owned much of the land in the province and dominated its politics for
hundreds of years. My immediate family retained a house near Garhi Khuda
Bakhsh Bhutto in Naudero, where my father and brothers used to go on Eid days
to offer guests the traditional holiday fare of rice cooked with sugarcane and
water flavored with flower petals. But since my grandfather's time the true center
of the family had been in Larkana, at Al-Murtaza.
Before the first land reforms in 1958, the Bhuttos were among the largest
employers of agricultural workers in the province. Our lands, like those of other
landowners in Sindh, were measured in square miles, not acres. As children we
loved to hear the story of the amazement of Charles Napier, the British
conqueror of Sindh in 1843. "Whose lands are these?" he repeatedly asked his
driver as he toured the province. "Bhutto's lands," came the inevitable response.
"Wake me up when we are off Bhutto's lands," he ordered. He was surprised
when some time later he woke up on his own. "Who owns this land?" he asked.
"Bhutto," the driver repeated. Napier became famous for his dispatch in Latin to
the British military command after he conquered the province: "Peccavi. I have
sinned." As children we thought it a confession, not a pun.
My father loved to recount other family stories. "Your great grandfather Mir
Ghulam Murtaza Bhutto, was a handsome and dashing man of around twentyone," my father would begin one of our favorites. "All the women in Sindh were in
love with him, including a young British woman. In those days, it was haram—
forbidden—to marry a foreigner but he couldn't prevent her feelings for him. A
certain British army officer, Colonel Mayhew, heard about this forbidden
relationship and sent for your great-grandfather.
"It did not matter to the British officer that he was in Larkana, the
hometown of the Bhuttos. It did not matter to him that the Bhutto land stretched
farther than the eye could see. The British had little respect for our family
heritage. All they saw was our brown skin.
'How dare you encourage the affections of a British woman?' the colonel
warned Ghulam Murtaza when your great-grandfather stood before him. 'I am
going to have to teach you a lesson.' And the colonel picked up a whip. But as
the colonel raised his hand to lash Ghulam Murtaza, your great-grandfather
seized the whip and lashed the officer instead. Screaming for help, the colonel
sought refuge under a table until Ghulam Murtaza strode out of the office. 'You
must escape,' Ghulam Murtaza's family and friends urged him. The British will kill
you.' So your great-grandfather left Larkana, accompanied by some companions
and the British woman, who insisted on leaving with him.
"The British were soon in hot pursuit. 'Split up,' Ghulam Murtaza ordered
his companions. 'One group come with me. The rest of you go with the English
woman. But on no account let her be taken by the British. It is a matter of our
honor.' And off they galloped in different directions, crisscrossing the river Indus
to deceive the pursuing British. The British moved perilously close to the party
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

26

with the British woman, for she could not travel with the speed of your
greatgrandfather. To fool them, the men dug a tunnel to hide in and covered the
entrance with leaves. When the British found the tunnel, your great-grandfather's
friends became desperate. They had promised Ghulam Murtaza they would not
hand the girl over to the British. They could not face the dishonor of surrendering
her to the enemy. Just before the British reached the woman, your greatgrandfather's retinue killed her."
Our eyes were wide by this point, but the story had just begun. Our greatgrandfather had escaped into the independent state of Bahawalpur. But after the
British threatened to seize the state, my great-grandfather thanked the Nawab
for his hospitality and crossed the Indus again to gain sanctuary in the kingdom
of Afghanistan, where he was a guest of the royal family. In fury, the British
seized all his lands. Our family home was auctioned. Our silk carpets were
auctioned. Our sofas made of the imported silks, satins, and velvets of the old
days, our plates made of pure gold and silver, the huge cooking pots used to
cook for the thousands of family followers on religious holidays, the embroidered
tents set up for celebrations were all sold. Ghulam Murtaza had to be punished
and punished severely, for it was unthinkable for anyone to defy the British. They
were like gods. Natives were not allowed to walk the same streets in parts of
India or to answer back to a Britisher, let alone strike one.
Finally a compromise was worked out with the British and Ghulam
Murtaza returned to Larkana. But his days were numbered. He became ill and
began to lose weight. The hakims, or village doctors, suspected poison, though
no one could find the source. Our greatgrandfather had tasters test his food and
drinking water, but the poisoning continued until it killed him at the young age of
twenty-seven. Afterward, the source was found to be his hookah, the water pipe
he used to smoke tobacco after dinner.
I loved hearing these family stories, as did my brothers Mir Murtaza and
Shah Nawaz, who naturally identified with their namesakes. The adversities
faced by our ancestors formed our own moral code, just as my father had
intended: loyalty, honor, principle.
Ghulam Murtaza Bhutto's son, my grandfather Sir Shah Nawaz, was the
first to start breaking the Bhuttos away from the feudal ethos that was stifling a
whole segment of society. Until his time, the Bhuttos had married only other
Bhuttos, first cousins or, possibly, second. Islam entitled women to inherit
property and the only way to keep the land within the family was through
marriage. Such a "business" marriage had taken place between my father and
his cousin Amir when he was only twelve and she eight or nine years older. He
had resisted until my grandfather tempted him with a cricket set from England.
After their marriage, Amir had returned to live with her family and my father had
returned to school, leaving a lasting impression on him of the inequities,
especially for the woman, of forced, family marriages.
At least Amir had married. When there was no suitable cousin in the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

27

family, the Bhutto women did not marry at all. For this reason my aunts, my
grandfather's daughters from his first marriage, had remained single all their
lives. Over great opposition from the family, my grandfather had allowed his
daughters from his second marriage to marry outside the family, though they
were not love matches, but strictly arranged affairs. A generation later, my sister,
Sanam, would become the first Bhutto woman to make her own decision.
Contrary to my expectations, I would follow the traditional path and have an
arranged marriage myself.
Still, my grandfather was considered very progressive. He educated his
children, even sending his daughters to school, an act that was considered
scandalous by the other landowners. Many feudals did not even bother to
educate their sons. "My sons have land. They have a guaranteed income, and
will never become employees or work for anyone else. My daughters will inherit
land, and be looked after by their husbands or their brothers. So why bother with
education?" ran the feudal ethos.
My grandfather, however, had seen firsthand the advances being made by
the educated Hindus and urban Muslims in Bombay, where he served in the
government during the rule of the British raj. By educating his own children, Sir
Shah Nawaz tried to set an example for the other Sindhi landowners so that after
partition of India in 1947 and the establishment of independent Pakistan, our
society would not stagnate. Despite the raised eyebrows of his peers, he sent my
father abroad to study. My father had not disappointed him, graduating with
honors from the University of California at Berkeley and then going on to read
law at Christ Church, Oxford, and to be called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn before
returning to Pakistan to practice law.
My mother, on the other hand, came from the new class of urban
industrialists whose views were more cosmopolitan than those of the landowning
class. While the Bhutto women still lived in purdah, rarely allowed to leave the
four walls of their compounds and then completely covered in black burqas, my
mother and her sisters went around Karachi without veils and drove their own
cars. The daughters of an Iranian businessman, they had gone to college and
after the birth of Pakistan had even served as officers in the National Guard, a
paramilitary force of women. Such public exposure would have been impossible
for the Bhutto women.
My mother became my father's second wife in 1951, Islam allowing a man
to have up to four wives provided he treats them all fairly. After their marriage my
mother entered purdah with the other Bhutto women, and at first was allowed to
leave the compound only once a week to visit her family. But the old ways were
getting tiresome to everyone. When my grandmother wanted to leave the family
compound in Karachi and there was no driver available, she often asked my
mother to drive her. When the family went to Al-Murtaza, my father insisted on
staying with my mother in the women's wing instead of returning to the men's
quarters. And when 70 Clifton was built there were no separate quarters provided
for the women, though my grandfather bought a house opposite to meet his male
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

28

visitors. A new and more enlightened generation was taking root in Pakistan.
In our male-dominated culture, boys had always been favored over girls
and were not only more apt to be educated, but in extreme instances to be given
food first while the mother and daughters waited. In our family, however, there
was no discrimination at all. If anything, I received the most attention. The oldest
of four, I was born in Karachi on June 21, 1953, my skin evidently so rosy that I
was immediately nicknamed "Pinkie." My brother Mir Murtaza was born a year
after me, Sanam in 1957, and the baby, Shah Nawaz, in 1958. As the firstborn, I
held a special and sometimes lonely place in the family from the beginning.
I was only four and my father twenty-eight when he was first sent to the
United Nations by the then president, Iskander Mirza. My father's subsequent
government posts as commerce minister under President Ayub Khan, then as
minister of energy, foreign minister, and leader of Pakistan's delegation to the
United Nations off and on for seven years kept him and my mother away from
home much of the time.
I saw my father as much on the front pages of the newspapers as in
person, arguing for Pakistan and other third world countries at the United
Nations, negotiating a 1960 financial and technical assistance agreement with
the Soviet Union, returning from forbidden Peking in 1963 with a border treaty
peacefully ceding 750 square miles of disputed territory to Pakistan. My mother
usually traveled with him, leaving the children at home with the household staff—
and me. "Look after the other children," my parents would charge me. "You are
the oldest."
I was only eight or so when I was left nominally in charge of the house
when my parents were away. My mother would give me the money for food and
household supplies, which I hid under my pillow. Though I was just learning my
sums in school, every night in her absence I would climb on a stool in the kitchen
and pretend to go over the accounts with Babu, our longtime and loyal
majordomo. Whether the figures tallied, I have no recollection. Luckily very small
sums were involved. At that time, ten rupees, about two dollars, bought food for
the whole household.
In our house education was top priority. Like his father before him, my
father wanted to make examples of us, the next generation of educated and
progressive Pakistanis. At three I was sent to Lady Jennings nursery school,
then at five to one of the top schools in Karachi, the Convent of Jesus and Mary.
Instruction at CJM was in English, the language we spoke at home more often
than my parents' native languages of Sindhi and Persian or the national
language, Urdu. And though the Irish nuns who taught there divided the older
students into houses with inspirational names like "Discipline," "Courtesy,"
"Endeavor," and "Service," they made no effort to convert us to Christianity. The
school was too good a source of income for the missionaries who ran it to risk
alienating the small numbers of Muslim families rich enough and farsighted
enough to educate their children.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

29

"I ask only one thing of you, that you do well in your studies," my father
told us over and over. As we grew older he hired tutors to instruct us in math and
English in the afternoons after school and kept track of our school reports by
phone from wherever he was in the world. Luckily I was a good student, for he
had great plans for me to be the first woman in the Bhutto family to study abroad.
"You will all pack your suitcases and I will take you to the airport to see
you off," he started saying to the four of us as early as I can remember. "Pinkie
will leave as a scruffy little kid and come back a beautiful young lady in a sari.
Shah Nawaz will pack so many clothes his suitcase won't close. We will have to
call Babu and ask him to sit on it."
There was no question in my family that my sister and I would be given
the same opportunities in life as our brothers. Nor was there in Islam. We
learned at an early age that it was men's interpretation of our religion that
restricted women's opportunities, not our religion itself. Islam in fact had been
quite progressive toward women from its inception, the Prophet Mohammed
(PBUH)* forbidding the practice of killing female infants that was common among
the Arabs of the time, and calling for women's education and their right to inherit
long before these privileges were granted to them in the West.
Bibi Khadijah, the first convert to Islam, was a widow who ran her own
business, employed the Prophet Mohammed (PBUH) when he was a young boy,
and later married him. Umm-e-Umara fought alongside the men in the Muslims'
early battles against their enemies, her powerful sword arm saving the life of the
Prophet (PBUH). Chand Bibi, the female ruler of the South Indian state of
Ahmadnagar, defeated the Moghul emperor Akbar and forced him to enter into a
peace treaty with her. Noor-Jehan, the wife of Emperor Jehangir and the virtual
ruler of India, was famous for her skill in the field of administration. Muslim
history was full of women who had taken a public role and performed every bit as
successfully as men. Nothing in Islam discouraged them, or me, from pursuing
that course. "I have found a woman ruling over them. And she has been given
abundance of all things and hers is a mighty throne," reads the sura of the Ant in
the Holy Quran. "To men is allotted what they earn, and to women what they
earn," reads the Women sura.
Every afternoon we read these and other suras from our Holy Book with
the maulvi who came to the house after our academic tutoring to give us religious
instruction. Reading the Holy Quran in Arabic and understanding its lessons was
the most important subject of all. We spent hours struggling over the difficult
Arabic, whose alphabet was similar to the one we used in Urdu but with totally
different grammar and meanings, like the differences between English and
French.
"Paradise lies at the feet of the mother," our maulvi taught us during those
afternoons, citing the Quranic injunction to always be kind to one's parents and
to obey them. Not surprisingly, it was an instruction my mother would often use
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

30

to keep us in line. The maulvi taught us, too, that our actions on earth would
determine our destiny in the afterlife. "You will have to cross above a valley of
fire and the bridge will be a hair. Do you know how thin a hair is?" he said with
great drama. "Those who have committed sin will fall into the fire of hell and
burn, whereas those who have been good will cross into Paradise where milk
and honey flow like water."
It was my mother, however, who taught me the rituals of prayer. She took
her faith very seriously. No matter where she was in the world, or what she was
doing, she prostrated herself five times a day in prayer. When I was nine years
old, she began to include me, slipping into my bedroom to lead me in the
morning prayer. Together we would perform the wuzoo, the washing of our
hands, feet, and faces so that we would be pure before God, then prostrate
ourselves facing west toward Mecca.
My mother is a Shiite Muslim, as are most Iranians, while the rest of the
family was Sunni. But that was never a problem. Shiites and Sunnis had lived
side by side and intermarried for over a thousand years and our differences were
far fewer than our similarities. What was fundamental was that all Muslims,
regardless of their sects, surrender to the will of God, and believe that there is no
God but Allah and Mohammed is his last Prophet. That is the Quranic definition
of a Muslim and, in our family, what mattered most.
During muharram, the month commemorating the massacre of the
Prophet's grandson Imam Hussein at Karbala in Iraq, I would sometimes dress
all in black and go with my mother to join other women in the Shiite rituals.
"Follow closely," my mother would say to me, for the Shiite ceremonies were
more elaborate than those of the Sunnis. I never took my eyes off the speaker,
who dramatically recaptured the tragedy that befell Imam Hussein and his small
band of followers at Karbala, where they were ambushed and brutally
slaughtered by the troops of the usurper Yazid. No one was spared, not even
the little children who fell under Yazid's knives. Imam Hussein was beheaded,
and his sister Zeinab was made to walk bareheaded to Yazid's court, where she
watched the tyrant play with the head of her brother. But instead of allowing her
spirit to be broken, Bibi Zeinab became filled with resolve, as did the other
followers of Imam Hussein. Their descendants, known today as the Shiites,
never let themselves forget the tragedy at Karbala.
"Hear the little baby cry for water," the speaker called out, her voice filled
with emotion. "Feel the heart of the mother, hearing the cry of her child. Look at
the handsome man on his horse, going for the water. He bends by the river. We
see him bending. Look! Look! Men are attacking them with swords. ..." As she
spoke some of the women performed the matam, striking their chests in anguish.
The vivid recounting was very moving, and I often cried.
My father was determined to bring his country—and his children— into the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

31

twentieth century. "Will the children marry into the family?" I overheard my
mother ask my father one day. I held my breath for his answer. "I don't want the
boys to marry their cousins and leave them behind our compound walls any more
than I want my daughters buried alive behind some other relative's compound
walls," he said to my great relief. "Let them finish their educations first. Then they
can decide what to do with their lives."
His reaction was just as welcome the day my mother covered me in a burqa for
the first time. We had been on the train from Karachi to Larkana when my mother
took a black, gauzy cloth just like her own out of her pocketbook and draped it
over me. "You are no longer a child," she told me with a tinge of regret. As she
performed this age-old rite of passage for the daughters of conservative
landowning families, I passed from childhood into the world of the adult. But what
a disappointing world it turned out to be. The colors of the sky, the grass, the
flowers were gone, muted and grayish. Everything was blurred by the pattern
over my eyes. As I got off the train, the fabric which covered me from head to toe
made it difficult to walk. Shut off from whatever breeze there might be, the sweat
began to pour down my face.
"Pinkie wore her burqa for the first time today," my mother told my father when
we reached Al-Murtaza. There was a long pause. "She doesn't need to wear it,"
my father finally said. "The Prophet himself said that the best veil is the veil
behind the eyes. Let her be judged by her character and her mind, not by her
clothing." And I became the first Bhutto woman to be released from a life spent in
perpetual twilight.
My father always encouraged me to feel part of the greater world, though
sometimes his lessons went over my head. I was traveling with him in the foreign
minister's private railroad car in the fall of 1963 when he shook me awake. "This
is no time to sleep," he said urgently. "There has been a great tragedy. The
young president of the United States has been shot." Though I was only ten and
had heard only vaguely of the U.S. president, he had me stay by his side while
he received the latest bulletins on the condition of President John F.Kennedy, a
man whom he'd met several times at the White House and whom he admired for
his liberal social views.
Occasionally he took my brothers, sister, and me to meet the foreign
delegations visiting Pakistan. When he told us one day that we were to meet
"some important men from China," I was very excited. My father had often
spoken highly of the Chinese Revolution and its leader, Mao Tse-tung, who had
led his army through the mountains and deserts to throw out the old order. I was
sure one of the men was going to be Mao, whose cap, a personal gift from the
Chinese revolutionary, was hung up in my father's dressing room. For once I
didn't mind being dressed up in the outfits my father brought back every year
from Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, where the saleslady kept our
measurements. But I was quite disappointed when the "important Chinese men"
did not include Mao, but the premier of China, Chou En-lai, and two of his
ministers, Chen-Yi and Liu-Shao Chi, who would subsequently die in jail during
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

32

the Cultural Revolution.
Chou En-lai wasn't the only "important guest" in Karachi who didn't match
up to my expectations. But this one we didn't get to meet. We knew a VIP must
be coming to dinner, because the outside of the house was covered with strings
of lights. When a limousine drove through the gates, we peered from the upstairs
window to see President Ayub Khan and an American gentleman enter 70
Clifton. I recognized the American immediately from the films we had seen
downtown. "Did you enjoy meeting Bob Hope?" I nonchalantly asked my mother
the next morning. "Who?" my mother asked. "Bob Hope," I said. "You silly," she
said to me. "That was the vice-president of the United States, Hubert Humphrey."
Later I found out that Hubert Humphrey was trying to elicit Pakistan's support of
America in Vietnam in the mild form of supplying badminton rackets for the U.S
troops. But my father refused even that gesture, being morally opposed to any
foreign involvement in Vietnam's civil war.
When I was ten and Sanam seven, we were sent north to boarding school
in the pine-covered former British hill station of Murree. Our governess had given
very short notice to my mother and was returning to England. Boarding school
seemed the quick solution and my father was for it, thinking the experience would
toughen us up. For the first time I had to make my own bed, polish my shoes,
carry water for bathing and tooth brushing back and forth from the water taps in
the corridors. "Treat my children like the others," my father had told the nuns.
And they certainly did, laying the brush on Sunny and me for any infringement of
the strict rules.
At Murree my father continued our political education by mail. Shortly after
he returned from the Summit of Non-Aligned Countries in Jakarta, he wrote us a
long letter elaborating on the self-interest of the superpowers in the United
Nations and the resulting neglect of third world countries. One of the nuns sat
Sanam and me down on a bench in the school garden and read the letter to us in
its entirety, though we understood little of its content.
During our second and last year at Murree, Sanam and I learned some
political lessons firsthand. On September 6, 1965, India and Pakistan went to war
over Kashmir. While my father flew off to the United Nations to argue for the right
of self-determination for the people of Kashmir and against the aggressions of
India, the nuns at the Convent of Jesus and Mary prepared their students for the
possibility of an Indian invasion. The road to Kashmir ran right through Murree, a
clear invitation, most everyone thought, for Indian troops to use it to march into
Pakistan.
Where once we had played jacks with goat bones after dinner, or read
Enid Blyton books, now suddenly we had air-raid practices and blackouts. The
nuns made the older sisters responsible for getting their younger sisters into the
shelters, and I made Sunny tie her slippers to her feet at night so she wouldn't
lose time looking for them. Many of our schoolmates were daughters of
prominent government officials or army officers, and with excitement we gave
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

33

each other false names and practiced them in case we fell into the hands of our
enemies. In the flush of adolescence, we were all quite dramatic about the
possibility of being kidnapped and carried off into the hills. But for the seventeen
days of the war, the threat of invasion was quite real and frightening.
The United States was making the situation in Pakistan even more
difficult. Alarmed to find that the arms they had provided Pakistan for use against
a Communist threat were being used instead against India, the Johnson
administration imposed an arms embargo on the entire subcontinent. But India
was also getting arms from the Soviet Union, and Pakistan wasn't. Despite this
handicap, our soldiers fought successfully right up to the time of the cease-fire
called by the United Nations on September 23rd. The country felt triumphant. Not
only had we repulsed the Indian attack, but we had taken more of their territory
than they had of ours.
Our elation was short-lived. During the peace negotiations held in the
southern Russian city of Tashkent, President Ayub Khan lost everything we had
gained on the battlefield. Under the Tashkent Agreement, both countries agreed
to pull their troops back to their prewar positions. My father was disgusted, and
tendered his resignation as foreign minister. When the Indian prime minister Lal
Bahadur Shastri died of a heart attack the day after the agreement was signed,
my father acidly remarked that he must have died from happiness.
As the terms of the settlement were disclosed to the people, massive
demonstrations erupted in the provinces of Punjab and Sindh, amidst reports of
police brutality. Still, the demonstrations continued. And the lives of the Bhuttos
were changed forever.
In June 1966, Ayub finally accepted my father's resignation. The
differences between Ayub and my father were now in the open and the ground
swell of popular support soared for my father as a political leader. On our last
ride home to Larkana in the foreign minister's private railroad car, the crowds
were frenzied, running alongside the train, hurling themselves toward the
handrails to try and ride along with us. "Fakhr-e-Asia-Zindabad! Long live the
Pride of Asia," the crowd roared, climbing on top of the train and running along
the tops of buildings by the track. "Bhutto Zindabad! Long live Bhutto!"
I was terrified in Lahore, where my father left the train to have a luncheon
meeting with the governor of Punjab. "There is blood on Mr. Bhutto's shirt,"
someone cried out. My heart froze until I saw my father return through the
crowds, smiling and waving. His shirt was torn and he had a small scratch, but
nothing more. His necktie was gone, too. I heard later that it was auctioned for
thousands of rupees. When he got back in the foreign minister's car, the crowd
started rocking the train, the momentum growing until I thought we would derail.
Safely back at home, the talk turned even more to politics. Terms such as
"cold war" and "arms embargo" had already become part of our dimly understood
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

34

vocabulary as small children. We were as familiar with hearing the results of
round-table conferences and summit meetings as other children were with World
Cup Cricket scores. But after my father broke with Ayub Khan in 1966, the words
"civil liberties" and "democracy" were the ones that came up most, mythical
words to most Pakistanis, who had experienced only restricted political
participation under Ayub—until my father formed his own political party in 1967,
the Pakistan People's Party.
Roti. Kapra. Makan. Bread. Clothing. Shelter. These simple promises
became the rallying cry for the Pakistan People's Party, fundamentals which the
millions of poor in Pakistan did not have. Whereas all Muslims prostrated
themselves before Allah, the poor in our country still prostrated themselves
before the rich. "Stand up! Do not grovel before others! You are human beings
and have rights!" my father exhorted the crowds in the most remote and forlorn
villages of Pakistan where no politician had traveled before. "Call for democracy,
where the vote of the poorest carries the same weight as the vote of the richest."
Who is Bhutto? What is Bhutto? Why do people say that everyone is
coming to hear him when only tonga drivers, rickshaw drivers, and rehri drivers
are at his public meetings, Ayub Khan's governor questioned in the governmentcontrolled press. As an idealist, I was shocked. Though we were living sheltered
lives and attending privileged schools, I had seen people without shoes, without
shirts, young girls with matted hair and thin babies. Did the poor not even count
as people? We knew from our Quranic studies that everyone in Islam was equal
in the eyes of God. We had also been taught by our parents to treat everyone
with respect and not to allow anyone to prostrate himself before us to touch our
feet, or to back out of our presence.
"There is no law of God that we here in Pakistan alone should be poor,"
my father continued to argue to the masses of poor and, increasingly, to the
groups of women standing shyly on the edges of the crowds. "Our country is rich.
It has many resources. Why, then, should there be poverty, hunger, and
disease?" It was a question people could readily understand. Ayub's promised
economic restructuring of Pakistan's economy had failed while his family and a
handful of others had become rich. In the eleven years of Ayub's rule, a group
known familiarly as Pakistan's "Twenty-two Families" had established practically
every bank, insurance company, and major industry in Pakistan. The outrage
drew hundreds, then thousands of people to hear my father's call for social and
economic reform.
The first floor of our house at 70 Clifton, Karachi, began to serve as a
branch office of the PPP. At eleven and fourteen my sister and I enthusiastically
paid the four-anna dues to join the party so that we, too, could help our
majordomo Babu sign up the increasing numbers of people who lined up at the
gates every day. But in the midst of our normal recountings of our days—who
had won at netball or cricket —we also began to hear my father's accounts of the
bribes offered him by the Ayub regime. "You are young, with your whole life
ahead of you. Let Ayub have his turn and later you will have yours. Work with us,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

35

rather than against us, and we will make things very easy for you," Ayub and his
colleagues were telling my father, the exact same words I would hear later from
the envoys of another dictator. When Ayub's bribery offers failed to silence my
father, death threats began.
The world of violence was unknown to me then. There was the world of
politics in which my father lived. And there was the world of the children, schools
and games, laughter at the beach. But the two worlds collided when news of
armed attacks against my father began to come in. Ayub supporters fired on him
at Rahimyarkhan, Sanghar, and other stops on his tour to popularize the PPP.
Thankfully, the assassins missed. At Sanghar, my father's life had been saved by
his supporters, who threw themselves over him and suffered injuries from the
bullets themselves.
Our house became filled with tension, but I tried not to show my fear.
What good would it have done? This was the life of politics in Pakistan, and
therefore the life we led. Death threats. Corruption. Violence. What was, was. I
didn't even allow myself to feel frightened. I tried, in fact, not to feel anything at
all, even when, eleven months after the founding of the Pakistan People's Party,
Ayub arrested my father and the other senior party leaders and threw them in jail.
That was the way of dictators. Where there is protest, crush it. Where there are
dissenters, arrest them. Under what law? We are the law.
The violent events of 1968 were not restricted to Pakistan. A revolutionary
fever was sweeping the world, students rioting on campuses in Paris, Tokyo,
Mexico City, and Berkeley as well as in Rawalpindi. In Pakistan, the rioting
against Ayub spread with the news that my father had been arrested and taken
to Mianwali, one of the worst prisons in Pakistan. It continued when he was
transferred to Sahiwal, where his cell was infested with rats. In an effort to quell
the disturbances, the regime closed down all schools and universities.
Meanwhile, I was facing the most critical time of my academic life,
preparing for my 0-level exams, which covered the last three years of my studies,
as well as for my SATs, Achievements, and my entrance exam for possible
admission into Radcliffe. I had begged my father to let me apply to Berkeley,
where he had gone, but he wouldn't let me. "The weather in California is too
nice," he had explained. "The snow and ice in Massachusetts will force you to
study."
There was no question of my not taking the exams, since they were sent
from England only once a year in December. "You stay in Karachi and study,"
my mother said, taking the younger children with her to Lahore to file a petition of
habeas corpus in the High Court against my father's detention. I was left alone at
70 Clifton, confined to the immediate area, which was far from the commercial
center where the rioting was taking place.
To distract myself from worrying about my father in prison I buried myself
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

36

in my work, going over and over my subjects with the tutors who came to the
house every day. In the evenings I sometimes joined my friends Fifi, Thamineh,
Fatima, and Samiya at the nearby Sindh Club, once a British enclave where
"natives and dogs" were not allowed, and now a sporting club for well-to-do
Pakistanis. We played squash and swam in the pool, though we all knew things
were not as carefree as they seemed. Ever since my father had started
challenging Ayub, some of my friends' relatives and "well-wishers" had begun
cautioning them that friendship with the Bhuttos was dangerous, an invitation to
reprisal by Ayub's regime. Samiya's father had been warned by the inspector
general himself that his daughter's friendship with me could bring trouble to his
family. Samiya and my other friends bravely stuck by me, though I noticed other
schoolmates beginning to distance themselves.
"I am praying for your success in your O-level examinations," my father
wrote me from Sahiwal prison on November 28th. "I am really proud to have a
daughter who is so bright that she is doing O-levels at the young age of fifteen,
three years before I did them. At this rate, you might become the president."
Though he was being held in solitary confinement, my father led me to
believe that his major concern continued to be my education. "I know you read a
great deal, but you should read a little more of literature and history," his letter
continued. "You have all the books you need. Read about Napoleon Bonaparte,
the most complete man of modern history. Read about the American Revolution
and about Abraham Lincoln. Read Ten Days That Shook the World by John
Reed. Read about Bismarck and Lenin, Ataturk and Mao Tse-tung. Read the
history of India from ancient times. And above all read the history of Islam." The
prison form was signed "Zulfikar Ah Bhutto."
I wanted more than anything to be in Lahore with my family, but I couldn't.
Sanam called to tell me that Mummy was leading women in protest marches
against my father's imprisonment every two or three days, making sure each
demonstrator carried a wet towel in a plastic bag in case Ayub's riot police fired
tear gas. Several times the police broke up the processions with bamboo lathis,
yet the demonstrations were continuing to grow. Ayub ordered the military out to
arrest the protesters. But the soldiers refused to arrest the women, waving at
them instead. Even under Ayub, women were still considered sacrosanct.
When the time for the O-level exams finally came in December 1968, the
Convent of Jesus and Mary arranged for us to take the tests at the Vatican
embassy, also in Clifton. Its sanctity and its distance from the commercial center
of Karachi made it the safest choice. While students in Britain sat for their
several days of exams in tidy classrooms, we were slipped in and out of
Pakistan's headquarters of the Church of Rome.
Meanwhile the rioting continued, the anger against Ayub mounting after
the police fired on the demonstrators, killing several. Now rioters all over
Pakistan began calling for Ayub's resignation as well as the release of my father
and the other political prisoners.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

37

Three months after my father's arrest, the chaos in Pakistan forced Ayub
Khan to let the PPP leaders go. Amidst rumors that the plane that was to bring
my father home to Larkana from Lahore would be sabotaged and my father
killed, supposedly by accident, my mother held a press conference to expose the
possible plot before it could be carried out. My father was brought to Larkana by
train instead. I have never been so happy to see anyone in my life. But the
struggle against Ayub was far from over.
"Get down!" my father shouted at Sanam and me during a victory march in
Larkana soon after his release. While our open car moved slowly through the
mobs cheering "Jiye Bhutto!" and "Girti Houi Dee-war Ko Aakhri Dhaka Dow"—
"Give the falling wall a final push"—an Ayub agent fired point-blank at my father.
Miraculously, the pistol jammed, but the crowd was unforgiving.
I peeked out from under my father's hand to see a young man literally
being torn apart. His neck, his head, his arms and legs were being pulled in
different directions as was his mouth, which was bleeding heavily. "Don't look!"
my father said sharply, pushing me down harder. I hunched down over my knees
while my father shouted for the crowd to let his would-be assassin live.
Reluctantly they did, but the sight stayed with me for months.
So did the sight of my father wasting away on a hunger strike in his
ongoing protest against Ayub's dictatorship and powers of arbitrary arrest. For
days after his release from prison he sat under a shamiana at Al-Murtaza with
other PPP leaders in full view of the street. All Larkana watched and grew
frightened as Papa got thinner and thinner. "Please give in to Papa," I silently
willed Ayub Khan, wondering why the men sitting with my father looked so well.
"They order food when they are in their rooms at night," one of the staff confided
in me. "Don't tell your father."
Like mushrooms, hunger-strike groups sprang up in front of the bar
associations and the busy streets of cities all across Pakistan. Large crowds
gathered every day to give the hunger-strikers moral support and call for Ayub's
resignation. Realizing that even his police could not control the situation, Ayub
finally stepped down on March 25, 1969. But the victory was hollow. Instead of
passing power to the Speaker of the National Assembly as laid down in his own
Constitution, Ayub designated his chief of army staff Yahya Khan the new leader
of Pakistan. Once again Pakistan was under the grip of a military dictator who
promptly suspended all civil law and imposed martial rule.
"You have a letter from Radcliffe," my mother told me in April 1969. I took
the envelope from her with misgivings. Did I really want to go? The college had
cautioned my father that at sixteen, I would be too young to enter Radcliffe, and
had suggested that I wait a year. But my father saw no reason to hold me back.
Instead he had asked the help of his friend John Kenneth Galbraith, a professor
of economics at Harvard and the former U.S. ambassador to India. I opened the
envelope. I had been accepted to the class of 1973.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

38

My father gave me a beautiful volume of the Holy Quran bound in motherof-pearl as a going-away present. "You will see many things that surprise you in
America and some that may shock you," he said. 'But I know you have the ability
to adapt. Above all you must study hard. Very few in Pakistan have the
opportunity you now have and you must take advantage of it. Never forget that
the money it is costing to send you comes from the land, from the people who
sweat and toil on those lands. You will owe a debt to them, a debt you can repay
with God's blessing by using your education to better their lives."
In late August, I stood in the carved wooden doorway of 70 Clifton while
my mother passed my new Holy Quran over my head. I kissed it. And together
we left for the airport to fly to the United States.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

39

3
REFLECTIO S FROM
AL-MURTAZA:

My First Taste
of Democracy

As my mother and I enter our second month of detention at Al-Murtaza,
the gardens are dying. Before my father's imprisonment and death we had
needed a staff of ten to maintain the large gardens and tend to the grounds. But
since Al-Murtaza has been turned into a sub-jail for my mother and me, Zia's
military regime has permitted only three gardeners to enter. I join the struggle to
keep the gardens alive.
I cannot bear to watch the flowers wither, especially my father's roses.
Every time he had traveled abroad, he'd brought back new and exotic varieties to
plant in our garden—violet roses, tangerine roses, roses that didn't even look like
roses but were so perfectly sculptured that they looked fashioned out of clay. His
favorite was a blue rose called the "rose of peace." Now the rose bushes begin to
shrivel and turn brown out of neglect.
Every morning in the lingering summer heat I'm in the garden by seven,
helping the gardeners haul the heavy canvas hoses from one bed to the next.
From the corners of the house the Frontier Forces watch me. It used to take the
staff three days to water the garden. It takes us eight. By the time we reach the
last rosebushes, the first have already begun to wilt. I will them to survive, seeing
in their struggle to live, denied adequate water and nourishment, my own
struggle to survive denied freedom.
The happiest hours of my life have been spent among the roses and the
cool shade of the fruit trees at Al-Murtaza. During the day the air carried the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

40

scent of the Din ka Raja, the King of the Day, the sweet white flowers which my
mother, like many Pakistani women, used to weave into her hair. At sunset, the
air filled with the scent of the Raat ki Raani, the Queen of the Night, which
sweetened the evenings we spent as a family on the terrace.
More hoses. More water. I sweep the leaves from the patio, and rake the
lawn until my arms ache. My palms become raw and blister. "Why are you doing
this to yourself?" my mother asks in concern when I slump, exhausted, by
midday. It is something to do, I tell her. But it is something more. If I work so hard
that every bone in my body is tired, then I am too tired even to think. And I don't
want to think of our lives wasting away under Martial Law.
I dig a new garden bed and plant rose cuttings, but they do not survive.
My mother is more successful with her plantings of ladyfingers, chilis, and mint.
In the evenings, I whistle to a pair of tamed cranes and am gratified when they
rush toward me, wings flapping, to take a piece of bread. Calling an animal and
having it come, planting something and having it grow, become essential. It is
proof that I exist.
When I am not working in the garden, time becomes something merely to
pass. I read and reread my grandfather's Earle Stanley Gardner books, though
the electricity is often turned off, leaving my mother and me to spend the days
and nights in darkness. There is a television set, but even when the electricity is
working there's nothing to watch. In my father's time, there were plays, films,
even soap operas on television, as well as talk shows and literacy programs to
teach the people to read. When I turn on the television now, there is almost
nothing but Zia, Zia giving another speech, discussions of Zia's speeches,
censored news programs reporting whom Zia met with or what meetings he
attended.
At 8:15 every night my mother and I tune in without fail to the BBC Urdu
report on the radio. Only on the BBC do we learn in November that the
American embassy in Islamabad has been burned to the ground by angry mobs
believing that the United States was behind the takeover of the Grand Mosque
in Mecca. As the story unfolds, my mother and I are astonished to learn that in
security-conscious and Martial Law-regulated Islamabad, buses had been
permitted to gather, pick up fundamentalist students, and deliver them to the
American embassy, which they then set on fire. The embassy had burned for
hours before the authorities, who had always turned up at the blink of an eye for
a PPP demonstration, made an appearance. The American embassy was
gutted, and one person killed. A contrite Zia went on television to publicly
apologize to the Americans and offer to pay damages. But what was he playing
at? It remains a mystery to this day.
The news on the BBC a month later is even more provocative. On
December 27, 1979, Russian troops move into Afghanistan. My mother and I
stare at each other when we hear the news on the BBC, knowing the political
implications are enormous. The battle between the superpowers is now right on
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

41

Pakistan's doorstep. If the United States wants a country which is internally
strong to meet the Soviet presence, they will move quickly to restore democracy
to Pakistan. If they decide to wait and see what happens in Afghanistan, Zia's
dictatorship will be strengthened.
America. I had experienced democracy for the first time in America, where
I spent four of the happiest years of my life. I could close my eyes now and
visualize the Harvard-Radcliffe campus, the crimsons and yellows of the trees in
the autumn, the soft blanket of snow in the winter, the excitement we all felt at
the first shoots of green in the spring. As a student at Radcliffe, however, I had
also learned firsthand the powerlessness of third world countries in the face of
the self-interest of the superpowers.
"Pak-i-stan? Where's Pak-i-stan?" my new classmates had asked me
when I first arrived at Radcliffe. "Pakistan is the largest Muslim country in the
world," I replied, sounding like a handout from our embassy. "There are two
wings of Pakistan separated by India."
"Oh, India," came the relieved response. "You're next to India."
I smarted every time I heard the reference to India, with whom we had had
two bitter wars. Pakistan was supposed to be one of America's strongest allies, a
geographical buffer against the Soviet influence in India and our other border
countries of Communist China, Afghanistan, and Iran. The United States used
our air bases in northern Pakistan for their U-2 reconnaissance flights, including
the ill-fated flight of Gary Powers in 1960. Henry Kissinger's secret flight from
Islamabad to China in 1971 was more successful, paving the way for President
Nixon's historic visit the next year. Yet Americans seemed completely unaware
even of the existence of my country.
They were also understandably unaware of the Bhuttos and I relished the
first anonymity I had had in my life. In Pakistan, the Bhutto name always brought
recognition and, with it, a sense of shyness for me. I never knew whether people
were approaching me on my own merit—or for my family's name. At Harvard, I
was on my own for the first time.
My mother had stayed with me for the first few weeks, settling me into my
room at Eliot Hall and calculating the location of Mecca so I would know in which
direction to pray. When she departed, she left behind warm woolen shalwar
khameez she had gone to great lengths to have made for me, lined with silk so
the wool wouldn't scratch.
I was attentive to her directions for prayer, but not to her wardrobe, which
was impractical in the rain and snow and set me apart from the other students. I
quickly shed the shalwar khameez and reemerged in jeans and sweatshirts from
the Harvard Coop. I let my hair grow long and straight and was flattered when my
friends in Eliot Hall told me I looked like Joan Baez. I drank gallons of apple
cider, ate unconscionable numbers of peppermint stick ice-cream cones
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

42

sprinkled with "jimmies" from Brigham's ice cream parlor, and regularly attended
rock concerts in Boston as well as the garden parties at Professor and Mrs.
Galbraith's, my "parents-in-residence." I loved the novelty of America.
The antiwar movement was at its peak and I marched with thousands of
other students from Harvard in a Moratorium Day rally on the Boston Common
and in a huge rally in Washington, D.C., where, ironically, I caught my first whiff
of tear gas. I was nervous pinning on my "Bring the Boys Home Now" button the
first time. As a foreigner I risked deportation if I was caught taking part in any
political rally. But I had opposed the Vietnam War at home and was becoming
even more radicalized by the antiwar fever in America. The motives of my fellow
marchers and mine were strangely the same: Americans should not be involved
in an Asian civil war.
Having been to six different branches of four schools in Pakistan, I
relished the continuity of four years at Harvard. And there was so much going on.
The momentum of the women's movement was building and the Harvard
bookstore was filled with books and magazines about women, including the bible
on campus, Kate Millett's Sexual Politics, and the first issues of Ms. magazine.
Night after night my friends and I gathered to talk about our aspirations for our
futures and the definition of the new relationships we would strike with whomever
we married—if indeed we chose to get married at all. In Pakistan I had been
among the minority who didn't view marriage and family as their primary goal. At
Harvard I was amongst a sea of women who felt as unimpeded by their gender
as I did. My fledgling confidence soared and I got over the shyness that had
plagued my earlier years.
In Pakistan, my sister, brothers, and I moved within a small circle of
friends and relatives. As a result, I was uneasy in front of people I didn't know. At
Harvard, I knew no one, save for Peter Galbraith, to whom I'd been introduced at
his parents' house just before college began. To my sheltered and conservative
eye, Peter Galbraith seemed shocking. His hair was long, he was dressed in old
and untidy clothes, and he smoked cigarettes in front of his parents. He looked
more like a waif the former ambassador to India had brought home with him than
the son of a senior diplomat and respected professor. Little did I know then the
role Peter, who became a good friend, would play in my release from detention in
Pakistan fifteen years later.
But Peter was just one among thousands of students at Harvard. At first I
had to ask directions to the library, to the lecture halls, the dorms. I couldn't afford
to be tongue-tied. I had been thrown into the deep end of a strange and foreign
pool. If I were to get to the surface, I had to get there by myself.
I settled in quickly, becoming social secretary of Eliot Hall during my first
year and later going on to try out for the Harvard newspaper, The Crimson, and
to give guided tours of the campus for the Crimson Key Society. "The official
name of this building is the Center of International Affairs, but we all know what
CIA really stands for," I would say conspiratorially to the new students,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

43

perpetuating the irreverent campus spirit that had so delighted me on my own
first tour. Harvard's controversial visual-arts building designed by the French
architect Le Corbusier fared no better. "The prevailing opinion is that the builder
read the plans upside down" was the standard wisecrack.
There were certain culture clashes, however, I found difficult to overcome.
I never did adjust to living in such close quarters to young men, especially after
Eliot Hall went coed in my junior year. Even finding a male undergraduate in the
laundry room was enough to cause me to postpone doing my laundry. The
problem was solved by moving to Eliot House on the Harvard campus, where my
roommate, Yolanda Kodrzycki, and I had our own suite of rooms and bathroom,
and the communal laundry room was much larger.
I had thought I wanted to study psychology. But when I discovered that the
major entailed courses in medical sciences and the dissection of animals, I
turned squeamish and chose comparative government instead. My father was
delighted, having secretly written Mary Bunting, the president of Radcliffe, to try
to steer me toward political courses. Instead Mrs. Bunting had kindly asked me
what I wanted to do with my life, never letting on that she'd heard from my father.
Comparative government certainly turned out to be a wise choice.
By studying government at Harvard I began to understand more about
Pakistan than I ever had by living there. "When a policeman holds up his hand in
the street and says 'Stop!' everybody stops. But when you or I hold up our hands
and say 'stop,' nobody stops. Why?" Professor John Womack queried the small
group of us in his freshman seminar on "revolution." "Because the policeman is
authorized by the Constitution, by the government, to enforce laws. He has the
mandate, the legitimacy to say 'stop' and you and I don't."
I remember sitting spellbound in Professor Womack's study, where I was
probably the only student who actually lived in a dictatorship. With one example,
Professor Womack had pinpointed the state of lawlessness and contempt in
Pakistan under Ayub and Yahya Khan, and later, Zia ul-Haq. The authority of
these dictators to govern was self-imposed, not a mandate from the people. I
saw clearly for the first time why the people in Pakistan saw no reason to obey
the regimes, no reason to "stop." Where there was no legitimate government,
there was anarchy.
I was hallway through my sophomore year when legitimate government
came closer to reality in Pakistan. On December 7, 1970, Yahya Khan finally
held elections, the first in thirteen years. On the other side of the world in
Cambridge, I studied all night by the telephone. When my mother called me to
say that my father and the PPP had unexpectedly swept West Pakistan,
capturing 82 of 138 seats in the National Assembly, I was exultant. In East
Pakistan, where Sheik Mujib ur-Rahman, the leader of the Awami League, had
run unopposed, Mujib had won an even greater majority. "Congratulations,"
people I had never met said to me the next day, having read of my father's
victory in the New York Times.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

44

My elation, however, was short-lived. Instead of working with my father
and the representatives of West Pakistan to write a new Constitution acceptable
to both wings of Pakistan, Mujib instigated an independence movement to sever
East Pakistan, or East Bengal, from the western federation completely. Time and
again my father appealed to Sheik Mujib to keep Pakistan intact, to work
together with him, a fellow civilian, to oust the military rule of Yahya. But instead
of showing flexibility and agreeing to what was a political necessity, Mujib
showed an obstinacy the logic of which to this day defies me. East Bengali
rebels heeded his call for independence by seizing the airports. Bengali citizens
refused to pay their taxes. Bengali employees of the central government went on
strike. By March, civil war was imminent.
My father continued to negotiate with Mujib, hoping to keep Pakistan
intact, hoping to spare East Pakistan the military reprisal so available to a military
regime. On March 27, 1971, he was actually in East Pakistan's capital city of
Dacca for another round of talks with Mujib when his worst fears were realized:
Yahya Khan ordered in the army to quell the insurrection. Alone in his hotel
room, my father watched Dacca go up in flames, sick at heart at the generals'
inevitable solution of force. And six thousand miles away in Cambridge, I learned
a bitter lesson.
Looting. Rape. Kidnappings. Murder. Whereas no one had cared about
Pakistan when I arrived at Harvard, now everyone did. And the condemnation of
my country was universal. At first, I refused to believe the accounts in the
Western press of atrocities being committed by our army in what the East Bengal
rebels were now calling Bangladesh. According to the government-controlled
Pakistani papers my parents sent me every week, the brief rebellion had been
quelled. What were these charges, then, that Dacca had been burned to the
ground and firing squads sent into the university to execute students, teachers,
poets, novelists, doctors, and lawyers? I shook my head in disbelief. Refugees
were reportedly fleeing by the thousands, so many of them strafed and killed by
Pakistani planes that their bodies were being used to erect roadblocks.
The stories were so extreme I didn't know what to think. The lecture we'd
been given about the dangers of rape during freshman orientation week at
Radcliffe had initially seemed as unbelievable. I had never even heard of rape
until I came to America and the very possibility of it kept me from going out alone
at night for the next four years. After the lecture, the possibility of rape at Harvard
was real to me. The rape of East Bengal was not. I found security in the official
jingoistic line in our part of the world that the reports in the Western press were
"exaggerated" and a "Zionist plot" against an Islamic state.
My classmates at Harvard were harder to convince. "Your army is
barbaric," the accusations would come. "You're slaughtering the Bengalis." "We
are not killing the Bengalis," I would counter, my face turning blue with
indignation. "Do you believe everything you read in the newspapers?" Everyone
was turning against West Pakistan, even the people with whom I had gone door
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

45

to door earlier in the year, collecting money for the victims of a devastating
cyclone in East Pakistan. "You people are fascist dictators," the charges
mounted. I wouldn't even try to bite my tongue, especially when I read that India
was training thousands of Bengali refugees in guerrilla warfare, then slipping
them back over the border. "We are fighting an Indian-backed insurgency," I'd
lash back. "We are fighting to hold our country together, just as you did during
your own Civil War."
There was no place to avoid condemnation, even when it was unfounded.
"Pakistan has denied the people of Bangladesh the right of self-determination,"
thundered Professor Michael Walzer in a public lecture on "War and Morality" in
the fall of my junior year. I shot to my feet in front of the two hundred other
students in the lecture hall and delivered my first political speech. "That's
completely wrong, Professor," I corrected him, my voice quivering. "The people
of Bengal exercised the right to self-determination in 1947 when they opted for
Pakistan." There was a stunned silence. But my point was historically correct.
The sadder truth, which I was refusing to face, lay in the disillusionment that had
followed the creation of East Pakistan.
How many times since have I asked God to forgive me for my ignorance. I
didn't see then that the democratic mandate for Pakistan had been grossly
violated. The majority province of East Pakistan was basically being treated as a
colony by the minority West. From revenues of more than 31 billion rupees from
East Pakistan's exports, the minority in West Pakistan had built roads, schools,
universities, and hospitals for themselves, but had developed little in the East.
The army, the largest employer in our very poor country, drew 90 percent of its
forces from West Pakistan. Eighty percent of government jobs were filled by
people from the West. The central government had even declared Urdu our
national language, a language few in East Pakistan understood, further
handicapping the Bengalis in competing for jobs in government or education. No
wonder they felt excluded and exploited.
I was also too young and naive at Harvard to understand that the
Pakistani army was capable of committing the same atrocities as any army let
loose in a civilian population. The psychology can be deadly, as it was when U.S.
forces massacred innocent civilians in My Lai in 1968. Years later, Zia's
suppression of my home province of Sindh would be no different. Members of the
armed forces can lose control and wreak havoc among civilians. They look upon
the civilians as "the enemy" to be shot or looted or raped. Yet during that terrible
spring of 1971, I clung to my childish image of the heroic Pakistani soldiers who
had fought so valiantly during the 1965 war against India. It was an image that
was to die slowly and painfully.
"Pakistan is passing through a terrible ordeal," my father wrote me in a
long letter which was later expanded and published as a book called The Great
Tragedy. "The nightmare of Pakistanis killing Pakistanis is not yet over. Blood is
still being spilled. The situation has become greatly complicated by the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

46

aggressive involvement of India. Pakistan will live purposely forever if we survive
the turmoil of today; otherwise catastrophic convulsions will lead to total ruin."
The catastrophic convulsions came on the morning of December 3, 1971.
"No!" I cried in Eliot Hall, throwing down the newspaper. Under the guise of
establishing order so that the steady stream of refugees pouring into India could
be reversed, the Indian army invaded East Pakistan and struck at West Pakistan
as well. Sophisticated Soviet-made missiles were sinking our warships at their
moorings in Karachi Harbor. Indian planes were strafing the city's vital
installations. Our weapons were so outdated, we couldn't even fight back. Now
the very existence of my country was being threatened.
"You are lucky not to be here," Samiya wrote me from Karachi. "There are
air strikes every night and we have had to put black paper on the windows to
block any light. The schools and universities are closed, so there is nothing to do
all day but worry. As usual, the newspapers are telling us nothing. We didn't even
know India had invaded East Pakistan until somebody knocked on our gate and
yelled. There's war! There's war!' Now the seven o'clock news says we are
winning, but the BBC Asia broadcast says we are being crushed. The BBC is
also reporting terrible crimes committed by the army in East Pakistan. Have you
heard anything about that?
"Your brother Shah Nawaz is the most excited thirteen-year-old in Karachi.
He has joined the Civil Defense and patrols the neighborhood every night on his
motorbike, telling everyone to put out their lights. The rest of us are terrified. I
was at your house with Sanam during one strike, and your mother took us into
the downstairs dining room, where there are no windows. At home, I'm sleeping
with my mother we're both so nervous. Three bombs have fallen just across the
street from our house but luckily they didn't explode. Our garden is full of glass.
"The Indian planes fly so close to the windows that you can actually see
the pilots! But none of our air force seems to be striking back. Three nights ago
the explosions were so loud I thought they'd bombed our neighbor's house. I
went up on the roof and the whole sky was pink. I found out the next morning that
the oil terminals in Karachi Harbor had been hit by missiles. The fires are still
burning. We are waiting for help from the Americans."
Military help from America never arrived. Though Pakistan had a defense
treaty with the United States, the arrangement suffered from mistaken identity.
The Americans were prepared to defend us from their enemy, the Soviet Union.
But Pakistan's real threat had always been India.
In the crisis of 1971, President Nixon eschewed military intervention for
safer diplomatic maneuvers, ordering what came to be called America's "tilt"
toward Pakistan. On December 4th, the second day of what turned out to be a
thirteen-day war, the U.S. State Department placed the blame for the hostilities
squarely on India's shoulders. On December 5th the United States sponsored a
cease-fire resolution in the United Nations Security Council. On December 6th,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

47

the Nixon administration suspended more than $85 million worth of development
loans promised to India.
But these maneuvers proved to be insufficient. A week after India's
invasion, Dacca, our last stronghold, was about to fall. Indian troops had also
crossed the border into West Pakistan. Facing total defeat on the battlefield and
the overrun of our country, Yahya Khan turned to the one elected leader in
Pakistan who, as such, had the authority and credibility to save Pakistan: my
father.
"I am coming to the United Nations. Meet me in New York at the Hotel
Pierre on December 9th," the message read from my father.
"Do you think Pakistan will get a fair hearing at the United Nations?" my
father asked me when I met him in New York.
"Of course. Papa," I said with the certainty of an eighteen-year-old. "No
one can deny that India, in violation of international law, has invaded and
occupied another country."
"And do you think the Security Council will condemn India and insist on a
withdrawal of her forces?"
"How can't they?" I answered incredulously. "It would be a travesty of their
mandate as an international peacekeeping organization to sit by while thousands
are being slaughtered and a country dismembered."
"You may be a good student of international law, Pinkie, and I hesitate to
disagree with a Harvard undergraduate," he said mildly. "But you don't know
anything about power politics."
Images from the four futile days my father tried to save a united Pakistan
still stand clearly in my mind.
I am sitting two rows behind him in the Security Council. One hundred four
countries in the General Assembly as well as the United States and China have
voted to condemn India, but under the threat of a Soviet veto, the five permanent
members of the Security Council can't even agree on a cease-fire. After seven
sessions on the Indian-Pakistan conflict and a dozen draft resolutions, the
Security Council has not adopted one. Everything that my father has taught me
about the manipulation of third world countries by the superpowers is being
played out in this one room. Pakistan is defenseless in the face of superpower
self-interest.
"December 11. 5:40. Our army is fighting heroically but without air and
naval support and facing a 6:1 ratio, it cannot last longer than 36 hours from
yesterday," read the notes I scribble on Hotel Pierre stationery. My notes the next
day are just as devastating. "6:30 a.m. Ambassador Shahnawaz called to say
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

48

situation grim. Only answer is Chinese intervention with Americans putting
screws on the Russians to prevent them from intervening. Papa sent telegram to
Islamabad saying hold on for 72, not 36, hours. General Niazi [the commander of
our army in East Pakistan] says will go forward to the last man."
On December 12th, my father calls on the Security Council for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of Indian forces from Pakistani territory, the stationing of U.N.
forces, and the means to ensure that no reprisals take place in East Pakistan.
But his pleas fall on deaf ears. Instead I listen in disbelief to an hour-long debate
on whether the Security Council should convene the next morning at 9:30 or at
the more leisurely hour of eleven. Meanwhile, Pakistan as we know it is dying.
"We must get Yahya to open the western front," my father says urgently to
the Pakistani delegation in our hotel room. "An offensive in the West will draw the
concentration of Indian troops from the East and relieve pressure there. Without
that pressure, we are in great danger of losing all of Pakistan." I place a call to
Yahya Khan in Pakistan for my father, but Yahya's military aide tells me the
president is sleeping and can't be disturbed. My father grabs the phone. "There's
a war going on! Wake up the president!" he shouts. "He must open the western
front. We must relieve pressure on the East immediately."
A Western journalist reports that General Niazi has surrendered to the
Indians in East Pakistan. My father loses his temper with Yahya altogether.
"Rescind the rumors!" my father shouts over the phone to Pakistan to Yahya's
military secretary because Yahya is still unavailable. "How can I negotiate a
favorable settlement if I have nothing to bargain with?"
The phones at the Pierre ring nonstop. One afternoon I take a call from
U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger on one line, and one from Huang Hua,
chairman of the delegation from the People's Republic of China, on another.
Henry Kissinger is very worried that the Chinese will intervene militarily on the
side of Pakistan. My father is worried that the Chinese won't. While Papa is
planning to ask Yahya to fly to Peking as a last resort, Henry Kissinger, I read
later, is meeting with the Chinese in CIA "safe houses" all over New York.
The Soviet delegation comes and goes from my father's suite. The
Chinese come and go. So does the United States delegation, headed by George
Bush. "My son is up at Harvard too. Call me if you ever need anything,"
Ambassador Bush tells me, handing me his card. Through it all I sit by the phone
in the bedroom, taking down real messages, relaying false ones.
"Interrupt the meetings," my father tells me. "If the Soviets are here, tell
me the Chinese are calling. If the Americans are here, tell me that the Russians
are on the line or the Indians. And don't tell anyone who really is here. One of the
fundamental lessons of diplomacy is to create doubt: Never lay all your cards on
the table." I follow his instructions but not his lesson. I always lay my cards on the
table.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

49

The diplomatic card playing in New York, however, all comes to an abrupt
end. Yahya does not open the western front, the military regime having already
psychologically conceded the loss of East Pakistan and lost heart. The Chinese
do not intervene, in spite of their statements of military support. And the rumor of
our premature surrender leaves a damaging legacy, even after the error is
corrected. The Indians now know our military commanders in East Pakistan want
to give up the fight. So do the five permanent members of the Security Council.
Dacca is about to fall.
On December 15th I take my accustomed seat behind my father in the
Security Council when his patience with the do-nothing strategy of the members
wears out. "There is no such thing as a neutral animal. You take positions," he
charges them, especially Britain and France, who out of their own interests on
the subcontinent had abstained in the voting. "You have to either be on the side
of justice or on the side of injustice, you have to be either on the side of the
aggressor or the aggressed. There is no such thing as neutrality."
As his impassioned words fill the chamber, I learn the lesson of
acquiescence versus defiance. With the superpowers dead set against Pakistan,
the prudent course would be acquiescence. But giving in to the superpowers
would mean becoming a party to the act. "Impose any decision, have a treaty
worse than the treaty of Versailles, legalize aggression, legalize occupation,
legalize everything that has been illegal up to December 15th, 1971. I will not be
a party to it," my father is thundering. "You can take your Security Council. I am
going." And with that, he rises to his feet and strides out of the room. Hastily I
collect my papers and through the stunned silence follow him out with the rest of
the Pakistani delegation.
The Washington Post termed my father's performance in the Security
Council "living theater." But for us it was a real dilemma affecting the future of our
country, if there was going to be a country called Pakistan at all. "Even if we
surrender militarily in Dacca, we must not be part of a political surrender," he said
to me later while we walked the streets of New York. "By walking out, I wanted to
make clear that though we can be physically crushed, our national will and pride
cannot be."
My father was very upset as we walked and walked, seeing the
devastating repercussions ahead for Pakistan. "Had there been a negotiated
political settlement, perhaps a political referendum under the auspices of the
U.N., the people of East Pakistan could have voted whether to remain part of
Pakistan or to become the separate country of Bangladesh. Now Pakistan will
have to face the shame of surrender to India. There will be a terrible price to
pay."
The next morning, my father began his journey back to Pakistan. I
returned to Cambridge. And Dacca fell. The loss of Bangladesh was a terrible
blow to Pakistan. Our common religion of Islam, which we always believed would
transcend the one thousand miles of India which separated East and West
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

50

Pakistan, failed to keep us together. Our faith in our very survival as a country
was shaken, the bonds between the four provinces of West Pakistan strained
almost to breaking. Morale was never lower, compounded by Pakistan's actual
surrender to India.
As television cameras focused in, General Niazi approached his Indian
counterpart, General Aurora, on the race course at Dacca. I couldn't believe my
eyes when I saw General Niazi exchange swords with the conqueror of Dacca,
an old classmate from Sandhurst, and embrace him. Embrace him! Even the
Nazis did not surrender in such a humiliating manner. As commander of a
defeated army, Niazi would have acted far more honorably if he had shot himself.
When my father landed in Islamabad, the city was in flames. Angry mobs
were even torching the liquor stores that had supposedly supplied Yahya Khan
and the members of his regime. Watching Pakistan's surrender to India on TV
after weeks of the regime's claims that Pakistan was winning the war sent huge
crowds in Karachi to storm the television station and try to burn it down. And
bellicose editorials in the Indian press threatened further devastation to Pakistan,
claiming our country was "an artificial nation which should never have come into
being."
On December 20, 1971, four days after the fall of Dacca, the people's fury
forced Yahya Khan to step down. And my father, being the elected leader of the
largest parliamentary group in Pakistan, became the new president. Ironically,
since there was no Constitution, he had to be sworn in as the first civilian in
history to ever head a Martial Law administration.
At Harvard I was no longer known as Pinkie from Pakistan, but as Pinkie
Bhutto, the daughter of the president of Pakistan. But my pride at Papa's
accomplishments was compromised by the shame of our surrender and the price
Pakistan had paid. In the two weeks of the war, one-quarter of our air force had
been downed. Half our navy had been sunk. Our treasury was empty. Not only
was East Pakistan gone, but the Indian army had captured 5,000 square miles of
our land in the West and taken 93,000 of our men prisoners of war. Pakistan
could not last, many were predicting. The united Pakistan that Mohammed Ali
Jinnah had founded after the partition of India in 1947 died with the emergence of
Bangladesh.
Simla, June 28, 1972. A summit between my father, the president of
Pakistan, and Indira Gandhi, the prime minister of India. The future of the entire
subcontinent depended on its outcome. And again, my father wanted me to be
there. "Whatever the result, this meeting will be a turning point in Pakistan's
history," he told me the week after I returned from my junior year at Harvard for
summer vacation. "I want you to witness it firsthand."
If the atmosphere had been tense six months before at the United
Nations, it was strained to the breaking point at Simla. My father was coming to
the negotiating table with Indira Gandhi empty-handed. India held all the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

51

bargaining cards—our prisoners of war, the threat of war trials, and five thousand
square miles of our territory. On the presidential plane to Chandigarh in the
Indian state of Punjab, my father and the senior members of the Pakistani
delegation were somber. Would tensions ease between our two countries at
Simla? Could we make peace with India? Or was our country doomed?
"Everyone will be looking for signs of how the meetings are progressing,
so be extra careful," my father advised me on the plane. "You must not smile and
give the impression you are enjoying yourself while our soldiers are still in Indian
prisoner-of-war camps. You must not look grim, either, which people can
interpret as a sign of pessimism. They must have no reason to say: 'Look at her
face. The meetings are obviously a failure. The Pakistanis have lost their nerve.
They have no chance of success and are going to make concessions.' "
"So how should I look?" I asked him.
"I've already told you. Don't look sad and don't look happy," my father said.
"That's very difficult."
"It's not difficult at all."
For once he was wrong. It was very difficult to maintain a neutral face as
we transferred to the helicopter at Chandigarh that was to take us to the hill
station of Simla, the former summer capital of the British raj in the Himalayan
foothills. It was even more difficult when we landed there on a football pitch and,
under the scrutiny of television cameras, were greeted by Mrs. Gandhi herself.
How tiny she was, much smaller than she seemed in the countless photographs I
had seen of her. And how elegant, even in the raincoat she wore over her sari
under the threatening skies. "As-Salaam 0 alaikum," I said to her, our Muslim
greeting of peace. "Namaste, greetings," she replied with a smile. I gave her
what I hoped was a noncommittal half-smile in return.
During the next five days, my father and the other members of the
Pakistani delegation were on a roller coaster of emotions. "The talks are going
well," a delegate told me halfway through the first session. "It doesn't look good,"
another told me that evening. The next day was an even wilder ride of optimism
followed by pessimism. Acting from a position of strength, Mrs. Gandhi was
insisting on a package settlement, including India's claim on the disputed state of
Kashmir. The Pakistani delegation wanted a step-by-step approach, settling
separately the issues of the territory, the prisoners, and our dispute over
Kashmir. Any sellout by Pakistan under pressure would be unacceptable to the
people of Pakistan and heighten the chances of a new war.
But while the negotiating teams were deadlocked, a phenomenon was
taking place on the streets. Every time I left the Himachal Bhavan, the former
residence of the British governors of Punjab where we were staying, people lined
the streets to stare at me. Cheering crowds began to follow me everywhere: past
the old cottages and country gardens planted by nostalgic British, on my
arranged visits to a doll museum, a handicrafts center, tinned fruit factories, a
dance program at a convent where I ran into several of my old teachers from the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

52

convent in Murree. When I walked down the Mall, where officials of the Imperial
Government had once promenaded with their wives, the crowds grew so huge
that the traffic had to be stopped. It made me feel quite uncomfortable. What had
I done to draw such attention?
Letters and telegrams piled up welcoming me to India. One even
suggested my father appoint me ambassador to India! Journalists and feature
writers scrambled to interview me and I was invited to speak on All India Radio.
To my chagrin, my clothes became a national fashion event, an embarrassment
to me not only because they were all borrowed from Samiya's sister, my own
wardrobe consisting mostly of informal khameez and jeans and sweatshirts, but
because I considered clothes irrelevant. I fancied myself more of a Harvard
intellectual whose mind was occupied with the serious questions of war and
peace, but the press persisted in asking me question after question about my
clothes. "Fashions are a bourgeois pastime," I finally said in exasperation to one
interviewer. But the story the next day had me blazing a new fashion path.
My father and the others among the Pakistani delegation couldn't
understand either why I was receiving so much attention. "You must be a
diversion from the seriousness of the issues here," my father decided one
morning, looking at the front-page picture in the newspaper of me waving at a
crowd. "Better be careful," he teased me. "You look like Mussolini."
His diversion theory was probably right. The talks were being conducted in
total secrecy, leaving the legions of international press gathered in Simla with
little to focus on, save me. But I felt my overwhelming reception also represented
something else.
I symbolized a new generation. I had never been an Indian. I had been
born in independent Pakistan. I was free of the complexes and prejudices which
had torn Indians and Pakistanis apart in the bloody trauma of partition. Perhaps
the people were hoping that a new generation could avoid the hostility that had
now led to three wars, burying the bitter past of our parents and grandparents to
live together as friends. And I certainly felt it possible as I walked the warm and
welcoming streets of Simla. Did we have to be divided by walls of hatred or could
we, like the once-warring countries of Europe, come to terms with each other?
The answer to that question lay deep inside the paneled conference
rooms of the British Raj buildings where the long and weary hours of negotiating
were going nowhere. My father extended his stay, hoping for a breakthrough. But
he wasn't optimistic. The Indians continued to refuse to even acknowledge
Pakistan's position on Kashmir: a plebiscite to allow the Kashmiris themselves to
decide which country they wished to join. And he was having difficulty with Mrs.
Gandhi. Though he had been a great admirer of her father, Prime Minister
Jawaharlal Nehru, Mrs. Gandhi, my father felt, did not have the vision and ideals
of her father which had enabled him to build India into a country of international
respect.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

53

I was not at all sure myself about Mrs. Gandhi. At the small working dinner
she had given for our delegation on June 30th, she kept staring at me, which
made me quite nervous. I had followed her political career closely and admired
her perseverance. After her selection as prime minister in 1966, the warring
members of the Indian congress thought they had selected a malleable and
token leader and had called her goongi goriya, dumb doll, behind her back. But
this silk-and-steel woman had outmaneuvered them all. To steady my nerves at
the dinner, I tried to make conversation with her, but she was very reticent. There
was a cold aloofness about her and a tense-ness which only eased when she
smiled.
My nerves were also unsettled by the fact that I was wearing a silk sari my
mother had loaned me. Even though she had given me a lesson in wrapping the
yards of material securely around me, I was nervous that it would suddenly
unravel. All I could remember was the story of my Auntie Mumtaz's sari in a
supermarket in Germany. The hem had got caught in the escalator and her sari
had unraveled until someone finally stopped the escalator. That memory didn't
help. And Mrs. Gandhi kept on staring.
Perhaps she was recalling the diplomatic missions on which she had
accompanied her own father, I thought to myself. Was she seeing herself in me,
a daughter of another statesman? Was she remembering the love of a daughter
for her father, a father for his daughter? She was so small and frail. Where did
her famed ruthlessness come from? She had defied her father to marry a Parsi
politician of whom he had not approved. Their marriage had not worked and they
ended up living separate lives. Now both her father and her husband were dead.
Was she lonely?
I wondered also if perhaps the presence of the Pakistani delegation in
Simla sparked more historical memories. It was in this very city that her father
had met with Mohammed Ali Jinnah and Liaquat Ali Khan to carve out the
boundaries of the new state of Muslim Pakistan from Hindu India. Now, as prime
minister herself, she could ensure the survival of that separate Muslim state. Or
she could try to destroy it. Which way would she go? The answer came four days
later.
"Pack," my father said to me on July 2nd. "We're going home tomorrow."
"Without an agreement?" I asked.
"Without an agreement," he said. "I'd rather go back to Pakistan with no
agreement than one imposed by India. The Indians think I can't afford to go home
without a treaty and will therefore give in to their demands. But I'm calling their
bluff. I'd rather face disillusionment in Pakistan than a treaty which sells out our
country."
A gloom fell over the exhausted delegation in Himachal Bhavan. Only the
shuffling of papers being packed up broke the silence. All that was left was the
courtesy call my father was going to pay on Mrs. Gandhi at 4:30 and the dinner
our delegation was hosting for the Indians that night. Then we would be off to
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

54

Islamabad.
I was sitting on the floor of my bedroom when my father suddenly
appeared in the doorway. "Don't tell anybody," he said with a new gleam in his
eyes, "but I'm going to use this protocol visit to try one last time with Mrs. Gandhi.
I have an idea. But don't be disappointed if there are no results." And he was
gone.
I kept going to the window to watch for his return, looking out at the mist
that blurred the pine trees on the hills, the curving mountain roads, the wooden
lodges. Simla was so like Murree, yet the people who lived on either side of the
border couldn't even visit the other. And suddenly my father was back.
"Hope has returned," he said with a huge smile. "We'll get the agreement,
Insha'allah."
"How did you do it, Papa?" I asked him as the somber silence in the house
lifted to be replaced by the humming sound of one delegate passing on the news
to another.
"I saw that she was very tense during our visit," my father told me. "After
all, failure was not only a setback for us, but for her, too. Both our political
opponents would use it against us. She kept fiddling with her handbag and gave
the impression that her tongue did not relish the taste of the hot tea in her cup.
So I took a deep breath and talked nonstop for half an hour."
We are both democratic leaders with a mandate from our people, my
father had told her. We can take the region to a peace which has eluded it since
partition or we can fail, deepening the already existing wounds. Military
conquests are part of history, but it is statesmanship which finds an enduring
place in it. Statesmanship requires looking to the future and making concessions
at the moment for the rewards they will reap. As the victor, it is India, not
Pakistan, who must make those concessions for the reward of peace.
"Did she agree?" I asked my father with mounting excitement.
"She didn't disagree," he said, lighting a cigar. "She said she would consult her
personal advisers and let us know at the dinner tonight."
How we all got through the banquet toasts, the speeches, the
pleasantries, I will never know. This time I was the one to keep glancing at Mrs.
Gandhi, but could read nothing from her face. After dinner, my father and Mrs.
Gandhi went into a small side sitting room while their negotiating teams went into
the billiard room, the largest room available. They used the billiard table as a
massive desk. Whenever they completed a point, or had a disagreement, one of
the delegates would take the papers into the sitting room to elicit a "yes" or "no"
from the two leaders.
The drafts and re-drafts, amendments and modifications, took hours. The
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

55

house got more and more crowded with journalists, television cameramen, and
representatives from both countries. I kept coming and going from the press of
people downstairs to my bedroom upstairs. "Anything happened yet?" I
periodically called from the staircase. Because no announcement could be made
unless it was official, the Pakistani delegation devised a code to enable them to
know how things were going. "If there is an agreement, we'll say a boy has been
born. If there is no agreement, we'll say a girl has been born." "How
chauvinistic," I commented, but no one was listening.
"Make sure you're downstairs if and when an agreement is signed," my
father had said to me before going into the sitting room. "It will be a historic
moment." As it turned out, I was upstairs in my bedroom when "Larka hai! Larka
hai! A boy has been born! A boy has been born!" rang out through the house at
12:40 A.M. I ran downstairs but in the crush of journalists and television crews, I
couldn't get into the room in time to see my father and Mrs. Gandhi sign what
would become known as the Simla Accord. But what did it matter? The longest
lasting peace on the subcontinent had been ushered in.
The Simla Accord returned the five thousand square miles taken from us
by India. It laid the foundation for the restoration of communication and trade
between our two countries and did not prejudice the stand of Pakistan or India on
the Jammu and Kashmir disputes. The Accord also paved the way for the return
of our prisoners of war without the humiliation of the war trials that Mujib was
threatening in Bangladesh. But it didn't provide for their immediate return.
"Mrs. Gandhi agreed to return either the prisoners of war or the territory,"
my father said to me when he came upstairs later. "Why do you think I chose the
territory?"
"I really don't know, Papa," I said, quite shocked. "The people in Pakistan
would have been much happier if the prisoners had been freed."
"And they will be freed," he assured me. "Prisoners are a human problem.
The magnitude is increased when there are 93,000 of them. It would be inhuman
for India to keep them indefinitely. And it will also be a problem to keep on
feeding and housing them. Territory, on the other hand, is not a human problem.
Territory can be assimilated. Prisoners cannot. The Arabs have still not
succeeded in regaining the territory lost in the 1967 war. But the capturing of land
doesn't cry out for international attention the same way prisoners do."
Returning without an agreement to free the prisoners was a hard decision
for my father to make and, predictably, there were many protests from their
families and opposing Pakistani politicians. Perhaps the Indian side was banking
on the inevitable turmoil to force him to capitulate. But he didn't. And all 93,000
POWs were released after Pakistan's recognition of Bangladesh in 1974.
As we flew back to Rawalpindi on July 3rd, the mood was jubilant, a far
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

56

cry from the somberness that had accompanied us to India. Thousands of people
were at the airport to welcome my father as we stepped onto the red carpet.
"Today is a great day," my father addressed the crowd. "There has been a great
victory. This is not my victory. Nor is it a victory of Mrs. Gandhi's. It is a victory for
the people of Pakistan and India who have won peace after three wars."
On July 4, 1972, the Simla Accord won the unanimous approval of the
National Assembly, even the opposition joining in the tributes. The Simla Accord
still stands today.
Unfortunately, the Constitution of 1973, Pakistan's first democratic
constitution framed by genuinely elected representatives of the people, does not.
While our whole family watched from the prime minister's box in the National
Assembly a year later on August 14, 1973, the National Assembly unanimously
adopted the Islamic charter which, unbelievably, had been supported by national
consensus, by our regional and religious leaders, and by my father's opposition.
As the majority representative of the National Assembly, my father became the
prime minister of Pakistan.
Until Zia overthrew my father and suspended the Constitution four years
later, the people of Pakistan enjoyed the first Constitution in Pakistan's history to
introduce fundamental human rights and ensure their protection. The
Constitution of 1973 forbade discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and
religion. It guaranteed the independence of the judiciary and its separation from
the executive. The first representative government of Pakistan finally had the
legal framework to govern, the sanctioned authority that Professor Womack had
brought home to me so clearly in his seminar.
As I prepared to leave Harvard in the spring of 1973, the strength of the
United States Constitution was being graphically demonstrated. In spite of the
balmy weather and the Frisbee games in Harvard Yard, many of us were rooted
to the televised Watergate hearings. My God, I thought. The American people
are removing their president through democratic, constitutional means. Even a
powerful president like Richard Nixon, who had put an end to the Vietnam War
and opened the pathway to China, could not escape the law of his land. I had
read Locke, Rousseau, and John Stuart Mill on the nature of society and the
state, the need to guarantee the rights of the people. But theory was one thing.
Seeing it unfold in practice was quite another.
The Watergate process left me with a profound sense of the importance of
nationally accepted laws, rather than whimsical or arbitrary laws imposed by
individuals. When President Nixon resigned his office a year later in August
1974, the succession of power was smooth and peaceful. The leaders in a
democracy like America's might come and go, but the U.S. Constitution
remained. We would not be so fortunate in Pakistan.
As graduation grew near at Harvard, I grew increasingly sad at the thought
of leaving Cambridge, of leaving America, I had been accepted at Oxford, as had
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

57

several of my friends, including Peter Gal-braith, but I didn't want to go. I knew
my way around Cambridge and Boston and had finally mastered the subway
routes on the MTA. I knew and understood the people. I could go on to the
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts before returning to Pakistan, I
pleaded with my father. But he was adamant that I go on to Oxford. Four years in
one place is more than enough, he wrote me. If you stay longer in America, you
will begin to put down roots there. It is time for you to move on.
For the first time I felt my father was pushing me. But what could I do? It
was he, after all, who was paying my tuition and expenses. I had no choice. And I
was a practical person.
My mother came to graduation and she and my brother Mir, who had just
finished his first year at Harvard, helped me pack. My roommate, Yolanda
Kodrzycki, and I gave away our furniture and took down our posters. Our suite
looked bare, as did Harvard Yard and the shelves at the Coop bookstore. Maybe
it was time to move on.
As the plane lifted off from Logan Airport, I strained to catch my last
glimpse of the Boston skyline. Shopping at Filene's Basement. Eating at the
communal tables at Durgin Park. Going to the Casablanca to forget our hockey
loss to Boston University. Man had reached the moon and I had seen the moon
dust at M.I.T. With the lyrics to a Peter, Paul, and Mary song—"I'm leaving on a
jet plane, don't know when I'll be back again"—running through my mind, I flew
home to Pakistan.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

58

4
REFLECTIONS FROM
AL-MURTAZA:

The Dreaming Spires
of Oxford

In our third month of detention at Al-Murtaza, my ear starts to bother me
again. Click. Click. The noises begin as they had during an earlier detention in
1978. Then the doctor called in by the Martial Law authorities in Karachi had
diagnosed the problem as a sinus condition aggravated by the plane flights I'd
taken every two weeks to visit my father in jail, and he'd cauterized the inside of
my nose to open the eustachian tube. Now, I start to feel the familiar buzzing in
my ear and the buildup of pressure. The local doctor visits, but the noises
continue. I ask the jail authorities to bring the doctor who had operated on me in
Karachi. I'm surprised when they bring in someone I don't know instead. He is
gentle and has a soothing voice. "Relax. You have been under a lot of stress," he
consoles me as he examines my ear.
"Ouch!" I cry out. "You're hurting me."
"You're just imagining it," he replies. "I'm just taking a look inside your ear."
When I wake up the next morning, there are three drops of blood on my
pillow. "You've perforated your eardrum. You must have done it with a hairpin,"
the doctor says when he returns. Hairpin? Why would I put a hairpin in my ear?
He writes out a prescription for two drugs, sedatives which he tells me to take
three times a day to relax me and make the clicking go away. But all the pills do
is make me sleep, and when I'm awake I'm depressed. My mother is shocked
when by the third day I no longer get up at sunrise to go into the garden, care to
take my meals, or even brush my teeth. She gets so upset she throws the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

59

medicine away.
For days afterward, the pain comes and goes while the noises increase.
Click. Click. Click. Click. I can't sleep, can't get any peace at all. Has the regime's
doctor deliberately punctured my eardrum, or was it a mistake? Click. Click.
Click. My ear feels full and I cannot hear properly.
I try to distract myself during the day by working harder in the garden.
Sweat trickles through the hole in my eardrum. Water from the showers I take
seeps into my ear. I don't realize, and was not told by the doctor, that I should
keep my ear dry, that water going into a perforated ear can make it septic. Click.
Click.
Unable to sleep at night, I walk around inside Al-Murtaza. Like 70 Clifton,
Al-Murtaza has been raided so many times that everything either has been
moved or has vanished. My father's collection of antique guns passed down from
my great-grandfather has been impounded by the regime and sealed in a
storeroom in the garden. The Martial Law authorities come to Al-Murtaza every
week to see if the storeroom seal has been tampered with, as if they expect my
mother and me to blast our way out with antique muskets.
I pass the now-empty gun room which we used as a family dining room
and go on to the wood-paneled billiard room where my brothers used to
challenge my friends visiting me from Oxford. A small ceramic of a fat Chinese
man surrounded by many children is sitting on a table in the billiard room, though
it belongs in the drawing room. I pick it up to return it. My father loved the
figurine, often joking that he wanted enough children to make up a cricket team,
but educating eleven children in the modern world was too expensive, so he'd
settled on the four of us.
Oxford, Oxford, Oxford, he'd drummed into all of us. Oxford was one of the
best and most respected universities in the world. English history took root from
Oxford. English literature, the Church, the monarchy, the Parliament, all had
some connection with Oxford. American education was very good, he'd allowed,
but was conducted in a more relaxed manner. Oxford would give us all a new
horizon and a sense of discipline. He'd entered all four of us at birth. As the
oldest, I was the only one who had the luxury of completing my Oxford education
before the coup derailed our lives. Mir left Oxford shortly after the beginning of
his second year to fight for my father's life in London, while Sanam never got
there at all. My years in my father's beloved alma mater meant a great deal to
him.
"I feel a strange sensation in imagining you walking on the footprints I left
behind at Oxford over twenty-two years ago," my father wrote me from the prime
minister's house in Rawalpindi soon after I arrived at Oxford in the fall of 1973. "I
was happy by your presence at Radcliffe, but since I was not at Harvard, I could
not picture you there through the same camera. Here I see your presence like
mine in flesh and blood, over every cobble of the streets of Oxford, over every
step you take on the frozen stone ladders, through every portal of learning you
enter. Your being at Oxford is a dream come true. We pray and hope that this
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

60

dream turned into reality will grow into a magnificent career in the service of your
people."
He had been far happier at Oxford than, at first, I was. Unlike Harvard,
where my roommate and I had had our own suite of rooms, my single room at
Lady Margaret Hall was tiny with a communal bathroom down the passageway. I
missed having my own telephone, and had to rely instead on Oxford's antiquated
message system, which generally took two days. And I found the English
reserved compared to my friends at Harvard, who had been instantly friendly. For
weeks I sought out the company of my American classmates who had come on
to Oxford. But my father kept after me, sending me a print of ancient Rome which
had hung in his room at Christ Church in 1950. "Before you went to Oxford this
print could not have had any meaning for you," he wrote from Al-Murtaza. "Now I
am sending it to you in case you want to keep it in your room." I hung it on my
wall, warming to the sense of continuity that now stretched from the dust of
Pakistan to the clean-swept streets of Oxford.
My father had warned me that compared to Harvard, Oxford would teach
me to work under pressure. As I struggled to write the required two essays a
week for my tutorials in politics, philosophy, and economics, I had to admit he
was right. He was right as well in urging me to join the Oxford Union.
Of all the various societies at Oxford, and there were many, ranging from
socialist, conservative, and liberal political clubs to those focusing on rowing and
beagling, the most well known was the Oxford Union Debating Society.
Established in 1823 and modeled on the House of Commons, the Union was
seen as the training ground for future politicians. I had no intention of becoming a
politician, having seen firsthand the pressures and strains of life in politics. I was
aiming for a career in Pakistan's Foreign Service. Nevertheless, I joined the
Oxford Union to please my father.
Aside from fulfilling my father's wishes, I was drawn by the art of debate.
The power of oratory had always been a great force on the Asian subcontinent,
where so many were illiterate. Millions had been swayed by the words of
Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, and, indeed, my
father. Storytelling, poetry, and oratory were part of our tradition. I didn't realize
then that my experience gained in the polite and paneled walls of the Oxford
Union would translate into speaking before millions in the fields of Pakistan.
For the three years I read PPE and the fourth year I returned to take
Oxford's course in international law and diplomacy, the Oxford Union was one of
the most important and pleasant focal points of my life. Its gardens and building
in the center of Oxford with a restaurant in the cellar, two libraries, and a billiard
room became as familiar to me as the rooms at Al-Murtaza. In the debating hall
we listened to speakers ranging from the feminist author Germaine Greer to the
trade unionist Arthur Scargil. Two former British prime ministers came during my
time at the Oxford Union, Lord Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath. Student
speakers dressed in formal clothes with carnations in their lapels, forcing me out
of my jeans and into the silks of Anna Belinda. After candlelit dinners, we set to
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

61

warring with words.
What tricks life plays on us. The first speech I was asked to give in the
main debating chamber under the busts of such former British statesmen as
Gladstone and Macmillan concerned the constitutional, not armed, removal of an
elected head of state. "That this house would impeach Nixon" was the motion,
which I was asked by the Union's president to propose.
"It is a paradox that a man who ran for the presidency on the issue of law
and order did his best to break the law and cause disorder in the length and
breadth of his country," I began my argument. "But then American history is
replete with paradoxes. Let me tell you the story of George Washington and his
father. When young George's father found somebody had cut down his cherry
tree, he was absolutely furious and wanted to know who did it. Bravely, young
George stepped forward and said, 'Father, I cannot tell a lie. I did it.' Well,
Americans began with a president who couldn't tell a lie and now they have one
who can't tell the truth."
With all the easy conviction of a twenty-year-old, I outlined the charges of
impeachable offenses against the American president, including his violation in
Vietnam of the war-making powers of Congress and the secret bombings of
Cambodia, his antedating the gift of his vice-presidential papers so as to claim a
tax deduction, and his alleged involvement with the Watergate cover-up and the
mysterious erasure of his secretary's tapes.
"Make no mistake, my friends," I concluded. "These charges are serious.
Nixon has consistently considered himself above the law, able to do as he
pleases. The last English sovereign to do so lost his head. We are proposing a
less drastic but no less effective surgery. It is said that Nixon once went to see a
psychiatrist who told him: 'You're not paranoid, Mr. President. You really are
hated.' Today Nixon is not only hated, but he has lost all credibility. By losing
credibility with his people, Nixon has lost his moral authority to lead the American
nation. This is the tragedy of Nixon and America."
Codes of law. Credibility. Moral authority. All these democratic principles
which I took for granted during my years in the West would be lost in Pakistan.
The motion to impeach President Nixon carried by a vote of 345 to 2 in the
Oxford Union. Guns, not votes, would overthrow my father in Pakistan.
But Pakistan seemed far away when I was at Oxford. Just as my father
had predicted, the light, happy years among the dreaming spires of Oxford
became the best years of my life. Friends took me punting on the Cherwell River,
and for picnics on the shaded greens of Blenheim Palace near Woodstock. Other
weekends we drove in the yellow MGB convertible my father had given me as a
graduation present from Radcliffe to watch Shakespeare at Stratford-on-Avon, or
to London, where I satisfied my craving for American peppermint stick ice cream
at the newly opened branch of Baskin-Robbins. During "eights week," when
rowing crews from each college raced each other up the river, we all joined the
garden parties held at the college boathouses, the men dressed in boaters and
blazers, the women in hats and long flowered dresses. We took exams "sub
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

62

fusc," wearing the traditional white shirts, black skirts, and black sleeveless
gowns which prompted even non-students in Oxford to call out "Good luck!" as
we ran by.
Unlike Harvard, where there were few foreign students (only four in my
class at Radcliffe, including an English girl whose definition as "foreign" struck
me as rather odd), there were many more up at Oxford. Imran Khan, the
Pakistani cricketeer, was there, as was Bahrain Dehqani-Tafti, whose father was
Iranian. Bahram, who was killed in May 1980, soon after the revolution in Iran,
used to entertain us for hours at the piano, his repertoire ranging from Gilbert and
Sullivan and Scott Joplin to Faure's Requiem. But though Asians were accepted
at Oxford as rather exotic individuals who did not fit into any particular class or
category, not all the British felt the same way.
In February 1974 I flew home to Pakistan to join my family at the Islamic
Summit my father was convening in Lahore. Practically every Muslim monarch,
president, prime minister, and foreign minister was there, representing thirtyeight nations, states, emirates, and kingdoms. After my father's call to the
Summit members to extend diplomatic recognition to Bangladesh, Mujib urRahman came, too, flown in on President Houari Boumedienne's private plane.
The Summit was a great success for my father—and for Pakistan. By
extending the olive branch to Mujib, my father paved the way for the peaceful
return of the Pakistani prisoners of war whom the Bengali leader was
threatening with war trials.
I returned to England enthusiastic with a sense of Asian identity—and
promptly encountered my first case of racism.
"Where are you planning to stay in England?" the immigration officer asked
me, studying my passport.
"Oxford," I replied politely. "I'm a student there."
"Oxford?" he said sarcastically, raising his eyebrows. Fighting irritation, I
produced my student identification.
"Bhutto. Miss Benazir Bhutto. Karachi, Pakistan," he said in a contemptuous
tone. "Where is your police card?"
"Right here," I replied, producing the up-to-date police card all foreigners
were required to carry in England.
"And how do you plan to pay your bills at Oxford?" he said with
condescension. I resisted quipping that I had brought pencils and a tin cup with
me. "My parents send funds to my bank account," I said, showing him my bank
account.
Still the nasty little official kept me standing there, going over my papers
time and again, looking up my name, which he obviously didn't recognize, in a
big, fat book.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

63

"How can a Paki have enough money for an Oxford education?" he finally
said, pushing my documents back to me.
I was furious as I turned on my heel and strode out of the airport. If that
was how immigration officials were going to treat the daughter of the prime
minister, how were they going to treat other Pakistanis, who were not as fluent in
English as I was or who were not as aggressive?
Long before I had gone to Oxford, my father had warned me about the
prejudice I might find in the West. He had encountered it himself as a student
when a hotel clerk in San Diego, California, denied him a room, not because he
was a Pakistani, but because his dark skin made him look like a Mexican.
He warned me again of the perils of racism when my letters from Oxford
and my references at home became as much Western as Eastern. He was
worried, I suppose, that I might succumb to the siren song of the West and not
return to Pakistan. "They (the Westerners) know in their heart of hearts that as a
student you are not going to remain permanently in their country," he wrote me.
"They accept you because they do not think of you as an immigrant, as a colored
liability. Their attitude changes completely once they come to know that you are
one more Pakistani or one more Asian who has returned to their great country
for refuge. They will begin to look down at you. They will think it unfair that you
should compete with them for any avenue of success."
His warnings really weren't necessary, because I never really
contemplated not returning to Pakistan. My heart was there. My heritage and
culture were there. So was my future, I hoped, in the diplomatic corps. I was
already getting diplomatic experience of sorts, just by being my father's
daughter.
During a 1973 state visit to the United States, where my father set in
motion the lifting of the arms embargo against Pakistan, I was seated next to
Henry Kissinger at the formal White House dinner. All I could think of through the
soup course was the irreverent Harvard Lampoon centerfold of the cigarsmoking secretary of state lying on a panda-skin rug, a treasured issue I had
immediately sent to my sister and Samiya in Pakistan. To distract myself during
the fish course I chatted to him about elitism at Harvard and other
noncontroversial subjects. I was therefore quite bewildered the next night when
Kissinger collared my father at another dinner to announce: "Mr. Prime Minister,
your daughter is even more intimidating than you are." My father had roared with
laughter, taking the quip as a compliment. I'm still not sure. . . .
Nuclear power was the subject in France, where my father attended the
funeral of Georges Pompidou in 1974. He had reached an informal nuclear
assistance agreement with Pompidou the prior year to provide Pakistan with a
reprocessing plant. What he didn't know was whether Pompidou's successor
would continue the negotiations. "Who do you think the next president will be?"
My father asked me over dinner with friends at Maxim's. "Giscard d'Estaing," I
replied, basing my projection on the excellent course I was taking in French
politics from my tutor Peter Pulsar at Christ Church. Luckily I was right, for
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

64

President d'Estaing did indeed agree to honor the agreement in spite of great
pressure from Henry Kissinger and the United States.
My presidential projections had not been so astute three years before in
China, where my father had sent my brothers, sister, and me to observe a
Communist state. In a courtesy meeting with Chou En-lai, the Chinese premier
had asked me who I thought the next president of the United States would be.
"George McGovern," I had replied firmly, repeating my choice again even after
Chou said his American sources had pinpointed Richard Nixon. As a loyal
antiwar activist at Harvard and resident of the liberal Northeast, I couldn't
conceive of any other choice but McGovern. "Write me your impressions when
you return to America," Chou En-lai asked me. I had. McGovern, I insisted again.
So much for my political shrewdness as a student.
My own—and more successful—presidential election was occupying me
in the fall of 1976 when I returned to Oxford for a one-year course in the foreign
service program. Although I was anxious to leave the world of academia for that
of diplomacy, my father felt strongly that his children, by virtue of being the prime
minister's children, had to be doubly qualified for any job so that no one could
accuse him—or us—of favoritism.
My brother Mir was entering his first year at Oxford, and I looked forward
to spending more time with him. But to me the real bonus of another year at
Oxford was the chance to stand for the presidency of the Oxford Union. Over
the years I had served on the Union's Standing Committee and as treasurer, but
I had been defeated in my first attempt for the presidency. This time I won. My
upset victory in December 1976 in what really was an "old boys' club," where
only ten years before women had been restricted to the upstairs gallery and
where the membership ratio still ran seven men to one woman, surprised
everyone, even my father.
"In an election one side has to win and the other has to lose," he had
written me shortly before the 1976 presidential election in America, bracing me
for the same loss Gerald Ford was about to suffer to Jimmy Carter. "You have
to do your best but the result must be accepted in good grace." A month later
the message from my father was very different. "OVERJOYED AT YOUR
ELECTION AS PRESIDENT OF THE OXFORD UNION," his cable read. "YOU
HAVE DONE SPLENDIDLY. OUR HEARTWARMING CONGRATULATIONS
ON YOUR GREAT SUCCESS, PAPA."
My three-month term as president was to begin in January of 1977. As Mir
and I flew home to Pakistan for the Michaelmas break, there wasn't a cloud on
my horizon.
"Come meet Zia ul-Haq," one of my father's aides said to me on the patio
of Al-Murtaza during my father's annual birthday party a few days later. And for
the first and only time I came face-to-face with the man who six months later
would overthrow my father and subsequently send him to his death.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

65

At the time I was curious to meet my father's army chief of staff designate,
having heard of the difficulty in filling the position. Six other generals had been
passed over for the top spot, all of them found by army intelligence sources to
have some sort of character flaw—drinking, adultery, doubtful loyalty. General
Zia was not without flaws either. He was rumored to have links to the Jamaat-eIslami, a fundamentalist religious organization which opposed the PPP and
wanted the country to be governed by religious, rather than secular, leaders. He
was also said to be a petty thief by one of my father's ambassadors.
But Zia also had a great deal in his favor. Unlike many of our army
officers, Zia had been untarnished by the carnage in East Pakistan, having been
out of the country during the civil war. And he was reported to be respected
among the army. No other criterion was more important to my father in the
drawn-out selection process that was increasingly exasperating to him. When
the different army agencies wrote favorable reports about Zia, my father chose
him. "The civilian government must not seem to be imposing their will on the
military. Zia may not be among the senior-most officers, but the men in the army
seem to like him," my father said with relief. And so on January 5, 1977, I came
face-to-face at Al-Murtaza with the man who would change our lives forever.
I remember being startled when I saw him. Unlike the childish image I
carried of a soldier as tall and rugged with James Bond nerves of steel, the
general standing in front of me was a short, nervous, ineffectual-looking man
whose pomaded hair was parted in the middle and lacquered to his head. He
looked more like an English cartoon villain than an inspiring model for the leader
of the Pakistan army. And he seemed so obsequious, telling me over and over
how honored he was to meet the daughter of such a great man as Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto. Certainly my father could have found a more commanding chief of staff, I
thought to myself. But I had said nothing to my father.
"I'm going to call for additional land reforms," my father confided in me as
we walked in the garden of Al-Murtaza on the afternoon of his birthday. "And I'm
also going to call for elections in March. The Constitution doesn't require
elections until August, but I see no need to wait. The democratic institutions we
have installed under the Constitution are in place and the Parliament and
provincial governments are functioning. With a mandate now from the people, we
can move on more easily to the second phase of implementation, expanding the
industrial base of the country, modernizing agriculture by sinking new tube wells,
increasing seed distribution and fertilizer production. . . ." The ideas flowed out of
him as we walked, his vision of a modern and competitive Pakistan becoming
nearer and nearer.
Many of his reforms had already begun. The PPP had delivered on its
campaign promises to the poor, beginning the redistribution of the land held by
the feudal few. My father had also begun his socialist economic policies,
nationalizing many of the industries monopolized by Pakistan's "Twenty-two
Families" to channel the profits back into the country. His government had fixed
minimum wages for those who had often worked for little or no compensation
from the tribal chiefs and industry owners, and encouraged the workers to form
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

66

unions, giving them a voice in management and a stake in their futures for the
first time in Pakistan's history.
Electricity had been brought to many villages in the rural areas. Literacy
programs for men and women were established and new schools were built for
the poor. Parks and gardens were sprouting in the dust of the cities and new,
metal roads were being built to link the provinces where before there had been
only dirt tracks. In a pact with the Chinese, a new highway was being carved out
of the Hindu Kush which would run all the way to the border of China. My father
was determined to bring modern prosperity to the people of Pakistan.
"My donkey keeps slipping on this new road," one farmer complained to
my father in Baluchistan. "I will show you a better kind of donkey that will get your
vegetables to market three times as fast," my father assured him. The next week
he had sent the farmer a jeep.
There was opposition to my father, of course. He was certainly not a
favorite of the industrialists whose private fiefdoms he had nationalized. Nor of
the landowners, much of whose holdings he had apportioned, along with his own,
to the peasants who had been working the land for as many as eleven
generations. The members of the Jamaat-e-Islami, many of whom were small
shopkeepers, raised their voices against my father's social reforms, especially
the government's outspoken support for women who worked outside the home
and the new laws forbidding sexual discrimination. My father's policy of
consolidation antagonized those with vested interests in separatism: the
secessionists in Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier who wanted
independence, the tribal chiefs who wanted to continue imposing their own rules,
not the central government's, on their hundreds of thousands of followers.
In fact, all the same factions which had existed at the birth of Pakistan in
1947 still existed in 1977: the regionalists against the central government, the
capitalists against the socialists, the feudals and sardars against the educated
and enlightened, the inhabitants of the poorer provinces against the rich elite of
the Punjab, the fundamentalists against those who favored modernization. And
over all lay the mighty shadow of the army, the single most organized and
smoothly functioning institution in fractious Pakistan.
Some Western political analysts and Pakistani military men argued that
democracy was in fact impossible for such a divergent and unsettled population
where the literacy rate and annual income were so low. Many in Pakistan
couldn't even talk to each other, each region having its own languages and
customs. Such a population could only be kept in line by military rule, the
argument went. But my father had disproved that theory by successfully
establishing a democratic government where elections, not military might,
determined the country's leaders. As 1977 began, there was no thought in
anyone's mind that his government wouldn't be reelected in March.
While my father prepared for the elections in Pakistan, I returned to Oxford
to organize debates at the Union. "That capitalism will triumph" was the subject of
my first debate as president, which I invited Tariq Ali, an ex-president of the Union
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

67

and a highly respected and articulate Pakistani leftist, to oppose. "That the West
can no longer live at the expense of the third world" was another debate designed
to focus attention on the North-South divide.
While the political opposition in Pakistan was banding together against the
PPP in a nine-party coalition of regionalists, religious fundamentalists, and
industrialists called the Pakistan National Alliance, I was arranging the fifth and
traditionally funny debate at the Oxford Union, whose motion was "That this
house would rather rock than roll." Rock music resounded throughout the
venerable debating hall for the first time while two friends from Magdalen College
sang a very loud duet about the Union to the tune of "Jesus Christ Superstar,"
then carried me out of the hall on their shoulders.
While I was busy painting the president's office at the Oxford Union
powder blue and having the debate programs printed in green and white, the
colors of the Pakistani flag, in Pakistan Asghar Khan, a leader of the PNA and
the former commander in chief of the air force, was announcing that the
opposition coalition would not accept the March election results, claiming they
would be rigged. I paid little attention to that charge, knowing that my father was
following the election procedures found in all democratic countries and had set
up an independent Election Commission, election tribunals, and election laws
under the jurisdiction of the superior courts to ensure that the elections would be
fair and impartial. Still, it seemed a strange campaign tactic for Asghar Khan to
be preparing the country not to accept the PPP's inevitable victory at the polls.
The election campaign became even more perplexing when on January
18th, the deadline for the candidates to file, the PNA did not put up a single
candidate for any of the constituencies where my father and his chief ministers
were contesting. How odd, I thought, as I read the story in England. Why were
they leaving the prime minister and the chief ministers of the four provinces
unopposed? Perhaps the PNA candidates knew they could not defeat my father
and wanted to save face. But that thought proved to be too rational. Their
explanation was not only ludicrous, but made headlines.
"We were kidnapped and prevented from filing," the opposition screamed,
claiming their proposers and seconders had been snatched by the police until the
deadline was passed. Their charges sounded ridiculous to me as I read them in
England. I did not believe for a moment that the members of the PNA had been
kidnapped, nor evidently did the chief election commissioner, who dismissed
their charges for lack of substantiation. If they had been kidnapped, they must
have arranged it themselves. But it was a clever move. Kidnappings for all sorts
of reasons were common in Pakistan, and many people probably believed the
PNA's claim of foul play.
I began to follow the campaign news more closely in the English
newspapers, in the Pakistani newspapers my parents sent me every week, and
in other Asian publications. The PNA was getting more irresponsible and
outrageous by the moment. Bhutto cannot be trusted, the opposition was
trumpeting. He plans to nationalize everyone's private homes and to confiscate
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

68

every woman's gold jewelry. Bhutto is a rich elitist, not a man of the people, they
scoffed. He wears suits from Savile Row, shoes from Italy, and drinks whisky
from Scotland.
Ayub Khan's ministers had made the same charge. My father's retort then
had delighted me, for he was an open person and never hid in public what he did
in private. "I don't deny that after an eighteen hour workday I take an occasional
drink," he had shot back during a public meeting in Lahore. "But unlike other
politicians, I do not drink the blood of the people."
I never doubted the outcome of the election. The PNA leaders were not
great men or even fine men. Most were much older than my father and had had
their time. They hadn't had the benefit of my father's education, or his extensive
experience in government and international diplomacy. In Pakistan, my father
was, in fact, unique. Politics had not traditionally drawn the cream of the crop
under the rule of the generals where real power was seen to lie in the civil
service, in the army, or in industry. Many of those opposing my father were
small, provincial men whose myopic views had failed Pakistan in the past and
would again in the future.
And their lies were growing preposterous. Bhutto is such a bad Muslim,
Asghar Khan was claiming, that he is only now learning how to perform the five
daily prayers. I could hardly believe my eyes when I read that charge in the Far
Eastern Economic Review in February, having prayed often with my parents at
home. But I loved my father's retort to that one too. When a reporter asked him
why Yasir Arafat, leader of the PLO, was coming to see him, my father quipped:
"He is coming to teach me prayers."
Under the campaign slogan of Nizame-e-Mustafa, the "Regime of the
Prophet," other coalition leaders were shamelessly using religion for political
ends. A vote against the party, the head of the Jamaat-e-Islami party told one
rally in a rural area, was a vote against God. A vote for the PNA was equal to
one hundred thousand years of prayer.
Saner opposition leaders, however, knew the religious issue was
explosive and avoided expanding on it. For all the spiritual muckraking going on,
they knew the PPP's adherence to Islam was unquestionable. It was my father
who had given the country its first Islamic Constitution in 1973, and he who had
created Pakistan's first Ministry of Religious Affairs. It was his administration that
had printed the first error-free Holy Quran in Pakistan, lifted the quotas past
governments had set to limit the number of Pakistanis permitted to travel to
Mecca on pilgrimage, and made Islamiyat, religious education, compulsory in
primary and secondary schools. My father's government had instituted Arabic
language programs on television to teach Pakistanis the language of the Holy
Quran, and a Ruet-e-HilIa!, or moon-sighting committee, to end confusion over
the beginning and end of the Ramazan fast. Under my father, the government
had even insisted that Pakistan change the name and symbol of the Red Cross
to the Red Crescent to commemorate its connection to Islam instead of
Christianity.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

69

I was therefore not too disturbed reading about the fundamentalist
element of the opposition campaign. The vast majority of the people, I thought,
knew that implementing the fundamentalist interpretation of Shariah would turn
back the gains Pakistanis had made in human rights and economic development
one thousand years. Banking would have to be abolished altogether, for
example, for strict interpretation of Islam sees the charging of interest as usury.
And women would lose every step forward my father had encouraged them to
take.
He had opened the Foreign Service to women, the Civil Service, and the
police force. To promote the education of women, he had appointed a woman to
the position of vice-chancellor of Islamabad University, and in the government
had named a woman as governor of Sindh and as the Deputy Speaker in the
National Assembly. Communications, too, were opened to women, female
newscasters appearing on television for the first time.
He had encouraged my mother, as well, to take a more active role. In
1975 she had headed Pakistan's delegation to the United Nations International
Conference on Women held in Mexico City. I had been very proud when she was
elected vice-president of the conference. Now she was standing for election to
the National Assembly, a symbol of my father's positive attitude toward women in
politics.
But as election day drew near, the PNA's attacks against the PPP only
grew wilder. Asghar Khan was promising to send his least favorite PPP leaders
to concentration camps when he took over the government on March 8th. And he
was boasting of killing my father.
"Shall I hang Bhutto from the Attock Bridge? Or shall I hang Bhutto from a
Lahore lamppost?" the opposition leader was saying. That truly jolted me. Asghar
Khan had been rumored to have relatives among the junior army officers who
had staged an unsuccessful attempt at a coup in 1974. Was he working up
factions in the army again?
I felt so far away in Oxford. My father had worked to bring democracy to
Pakistan. But not all the people, it was turning out, had learned the selfdiscipline that democracy requires. In one Karachi neighborhood, a PNA
candidate sprayed a poster of my father with machine-gun fire, killing a young
child standing by.
"The opposition has behaved quite badly, so much so that even a
politically apathetic cabbage like myself has been jolted into taking notice," a
schoolfriend wrote me from Karachi in February. "Now more than ever all of
Pakistan realizes how desperately we need your father. God forbid, if anyone
else were to even come close to taking over the reins, I think it would destroy us
as a nation."
On election night I joined Mir in his rooms opposite Christ's College to wait
by the phone. The Pakistani ambassador in London and one of my father's
ministers both had promised to call as soon as they had any news of the results.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

70

Mir was predicting the PPP would win between 150 and 156 seats in the National
Assembly. When the phone rang, it was my father, his voice hoarse from
campaigning, calling with the news that the PPP had won 154 of 200 seats.
"Congratulations, Papa. I am so happy for you," I yelled into the phone. I was as
excited by the PPP victory as I was relieved that the election tension was over.
But it wasn't.
True to the coalition's threat, the PNA claimed the national election results
were rigged and announced it would boycott the provincial assembly elections
scheduled three days later. And the agitation increased.
Swarms of young men on motor scooters were suddenly reported to be
racing through Karachi, leaving cinemas, banks, liquor stores, and any houses
flying the PPP flag burning in their wake. Thirteen members of one family were
torched in one home, and when in his final agony one of the victims asked for
water, the hooligans responded by urinating in his mouth. A PPP member was
lynched, his body left to hang from a public lamppost until the police cut it down.
Death threats were issued to innumerable other PPP ministers and
parliamentarians, as were threats to kidnap their children from school.
A nightmare was unfolding in Karachi. Every morning I rushed to the
common room in St. Catherine's College to snatch up the English papers before
checking my mailbox for the Pakistani papers. Mir and I pored over them in
disbelief. We had seen democracy in America and England, where political
opponents did not often resort to such terrorist attacks and goondaism, and both
of us found the PNA's tactics appalling. We also grew increasingly suspicious
about their implications. It was obvious that the PNA had no interest in elections.
Perhaps their continued agitations were paving the way for some intervention in
government, like an army takeover.
The army was the key. But there was no reason to doubt the loyalty of the
armed forces. My father was very popular among the army and his selection of
Zia as army chief of staff over six more senior officers seemed to ensure Zia's
support as well. In our culture, one does not betray one's benefactor. Still, Asghar
Khan was trying to win over the army, circulating a letter he had written to the
armed forces implicitly calling on them to take over the government. But it fell on
deaf ears. Instead the chiefs of staff—navy, air force, and army—released a
statement in support of my father's elected civilian government. The PNA was
getting nowhere.
After almost three weeks of unrest in Karachi and Hyderabad, the PNA
tried to carry the rioting and looting to Lahore. Again packs of twenty to thirty men
on scooters were dispatched, this time to the bazaars, where they pelted
shoppers with stones, forcing merchants to pull down their shutters in fear. At
times the hooligans doused banks and buses with petrol and set them on fire
before riding off.
Reading the papers at Oxford, Mir and I were disgusted at the PNA's
attempts to stir up agitation. Instead of accepting defeat by democratic means,
these old-style politicians were resorting to violence and rumor. "Begum Bhutto
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

71

has fled with her suitcases," one such PNA rumor spread. "Bhutto will follow
soon."
My father was so assured of the PPP's strength that he offered to hold
new provincial elections and if the PNA won a majority, to rerun the general
elections, but the leaders of the PNA refused to even sit down and talk with him.
Nothing would satisfy them but his resignation. And naturally my father refused,
having just been returned overwhelmingly to office in a fair and democratic
election.
The PNA's terrorist tactics even reached me at Oxford. I was startled one
afternoon in late March to find a member of Scotland Yard waiting for me when I
returned from the Bodleian Library. "I don't wish to alarm you, Miss Bhutto, but
there have been reports that you may be in some danger," the British officer told
me.
I didn't think Scotland Yard would bother to send anyone all the way to
Oxford to tell me something if it were not in my best interest.
So from that day until I left Oxford in June I followed his instructions
carefully, looking under my car to check for any explosives before opening the
door, inspecting the lock to see if it had been tampered with. I also followed
Scotland Yard's instructions to vary my schedule and not to follow a routine. If I
had a ten o'clock class, I would leave for it as early as 9:30 or as late as 9:55.
Today, I still use some of the security measures Scotland Yard taught me.
In Pakistan the PNA's agitations were fizzling by early April. The trouble
seemed to be over when the news from home took a new and ominous turn.
People had fistfuls of American dollars and were quitting their jobs, my
friend Samiya wrote me, including my cousin Fakhri's servants and those of their
friends. "We get better pay by demonstrating for the PNA," the servants claimed.
Since March, she wrote, the flood of American currency had driven the value of
the dollar in the black market down by 30 percent. At no seeming financial loss,
private truckers and bus drivers had gone on strike in Karachi, forcing a factory
slowdown because the employees couldn't get to work. Those, same trucks and
buses, however, were available to transport the people to PNA demonstrations.
Asians have always been prone to conspiracy theories. But in this case
my father and other members of the PPP were convinced that the unrest was
due to American involvement. I could see for myself when the truckers went on
strike that the pattern of economic dislocation was similar to the one in Chile
during the ClA-sponsored military overthrow of President Allende and his
democratically elected government. Our intelligence had also noted frequent
meetings between American diplomats and members of the PNA.
The effectiveness of the PNA-sponsored strikes was suspicious as well.
When my father came to power, he learned that in 1958 the United States had
held top-secret maneuvers with the Pakistani army to teach them the art of
immobilizing a government through strikes. The secret maneuvers then had
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

72

been called "Operation Wheel Jam." Now the PNA was calling for a nationwide
strike. Its name? "Operation Wheel Jam."
I didn't want to believe the United States was actively destabilizing the
democratically elected government of Pakistan. But I kept coming back to a
remark Henry Kissinger had made to my father during a visit to Pakistan in the
summer of 1976. The issue then had been my father's determination to move
ahead with France on the nuclear reprocessing plant, a plant which would give
Pakistan energy at a time when skyrocketing oil prices had adversely affected
the economies of even the prosperous West. Dr. Kissinger had been equally
determined to dissuade my father from continuing his agreement with France.
The U.S. government evidently saw the plant only as potentially producing a
nuclear device, and the "Islamic bomb," as it came to be known, was decidely
not in the best interests of the free world.
The meeting had not gone well and my father had been flushed with anger
when he returned home. Henry Kissinger, he told me, had spoken to him crudely
and arrogantly. The U.S. secretary of state had made it clear that the
Reprocessing Plant Agreement was not acceptable to the United States. The
agreement had to be either cancelled or delayed for several years until new
technology excluded the possibility of the nuclear device option. During the
meeting Kissinger had claimed that he considered my father a brilliant
statesman. It was only as a "well-wisher" that he was warning him: Reconsider
the agreement with France or risk being made into "a horrible example."
Now I couldn't erase that conversation from my mind, even though Jimmy
Carter had taken office as president of the United States three months and Cyrus
Vance, not Henry Kissinger, was now secretary of state. But changes in the U.S.
administration did not necessarily mean changes in all the U.S. centers of power.
From my seven years of government studies I knew that the CIA was often
autonomous and that their policies were not established overnight. Had it been
their policy option to get rid of my father if they could not get him to cancel the
Reprocessing Plant Agreement? Had my father inadvertently played into their
hands by calling elections a full year ahead of schedule?
I could just picture the CIA dossier on my father. Here was a man who had
spoken out against American policy during the Vietnam War, who had promoted
normalized relations with Communist China, who had supported the Arabs during
the 1973 war with Israel, and who had advocated independence from the
superpowers at third world conferences. Was he getting too big for his boots?
Another intelligence report came in, this one a taped conversation
between two American diplomats in Islamabad. "The party's over! He's gone!"
one had said, referring to my father's government. "Gentlemen, the party is not
over," my father responded in an address to the National Assembly, "and it will
not be over until my mission is completed for this great nation." Meanwhile the
subsidized fundamentalists in the streets were sinking to a new low. "Bhutto is a
Hindu, Bhutto is a Jew," they chanted, as if the two religions, neither of which my
Muslim father practiced, were compatible.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

73

"I do not know what to write about the situation here," my mother wrote
me. "I know what we read in the newspapers and you get the papers there, too.
The Morning News is the most correct paper and does not believe in
sensationalism, so actually you know as much as I know.
"I have written to Sanam [my sister had entered Harvard in 1975] and Mir
not to invite any friends this summer. I do not know if they have gotten my letters,
as many have gone astray. If you get this letter, let the others know just in case."
The leaders of the PNA continued to refuse my father's offer to negotiate a
peaceful solution. In the face of looting, arson, and murder of PPP supporters,
my father was forced to detain several of the PNA leaders. Perhaps the
temporary silencing of their calls to violence would calm the country. But on April
20th, the long-planned-for "Operation Wheel Jam" paralyzed Karachi's streets.
The truckers were on strike, and shops, banks, markets, and textile mills
remained closed. On April 21st, in accordance with the Constitution, my father
called out the army in the aid of civil powers in the major cities of Karachi,
Lahore, and Hyderabad. The protests subsided. A massive demonstration and
nationwide strike called for April 22nd never materialized. Nor a week later did
the "Long March," the PNA's call for two million people to march to Rawalpindi
and surround the prime minister's house. The failure of the Long March
punctured the balloon of the PNA agitation once and for all. My father drove
through the streets of Rawalpindi greeted by cheering crowds.
But the PNA agitation had taken its toll. Thousands of new cars and buses
had been burned. Factories in Karachi were closed or behind schedule. Millions
of rupees' worth of property had been destroyed. Lives had been lost. I breathed
a sigh of relief when the papers reported on June 3rd that the PNA had finally
agreed to talk with my father, while my father seemed amenable to the idea of
dissolving his government in preparation for fresh elections.
Reason seemed to be returning at last to Pakistan. Four days into the
negotiations my father withdrew the army, and a week later the PNA leaders and
others detained during the troubles were freed. Following my father's
announcement that he would hold new elections in October, even the most
stubborn PNA leaders seemed optimistic about the future. "I now see a light at
the end of the tunnel. Let us pray it is not a mirage," one of the opposition was
quoted in the June 13th issue of Newsweek after meeting with my father.
Relations with the United States, too, seemed to be improving. The
Pakistani foreign secretary, Mr. Aziz Ahmed, flew to Paris to meet with the U.S.
secretary of state, Cyrus Vance. He took with him a fifty-page Foreign Office
report containing the grounds of our suspicion about American involvement in the
destabilization of the government. My father told me that Secretary Vance put it
to one side. "No, Mr. Aziz Ahmed, we want to start a new chapter with Pakistan,"
the secretary of state reportedly said. "We value greatly the long and close
friendship we have with your country."

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

74

Did the Americans play a role in disrupting my father's government? We
will never have proof. I have since tried through friends in America to obtain
information through the Freedom of Information Act, but was unsuccessful. The
CIA sent back six documents, including an analysis of China's support for
Pakistan during the 1965 war with India when my father was foreign minister, and
a cable reporting the movement of civilian convoys through Rawalpindi during the
same period. Only one document dealt with my father and the PPP, and that only
with the resistance to his proposed Constitution of 1973.
"We can neither confirm nor deny the existence or nonexistence of any
CIA records responsive to your request for records pertaining to Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto," the covering letter read. "Such information, unless, of course, it has
been officially acknowledged, would be classified for reasons of national security.
By this action, we are neither confirming nor denying the existence or
nonexistence of such records. Accordingly, this portion of your request for
documents pertaining to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto is denied. . . ."
Whatever happened in Pakistan in 1977 happened because some of the
people allowed it to happen. If the leaders of the PNA had acted in Pakistan's
national interest rather than their own, if my father's chief of staff had acted in
Pakistan's national interest rather than his own, the government could not have
been overthrown. It was—and is—an important lesson for all of us to learn. The
United States was acting in its national self-interest, but we were not acting in our
own. Some people take the easy way out by putting the whole blame for the
events of 1977 on the United States. Had there not been those among us who
collaborated, who looked for their own chance at power rather than the value of
serving their country, there could never have been any harm done to the elected
government of Pakistan. But as a student at Oxford, I did not yet understand that.
The sun was shining brightly when I woke up on my twenty-fourth
birthday. June 21st promised to be a hot summer day and I looked forward to the
big birthday and farewell party I was giving myself in the gardens of Queen
Elizabeth House before returning to Pakistan. I must have invited the entire
contents of my Oxford address book and, judging from the crowd of people,
everybody came. Over bowls of strawberries and cream, we reminisced and
exchanged home addresses.
I was sad at leaving Oxford and so many friends. I was sorry, also, at
leaving my little yellow car, which Mir was planning to sell for me in the autumn.
For four years my MGB had served as a bulletin board for messages from my
friends as well as parking tickets from the zealous traffic wardens. But I was also
very excited about the prospects awaiting me in Pakistan. My father had
discussed some of his tentative plans for me, which included working for the
prime minister's office during the summer as well as for the Inter-Provincial
Council of Common Interests so I could familiarize myself with common
provincial concerns. In September, he told me, he was going to send me to the
United Nations as part of the Pakistani delegation, which would give me good
exposure. I would return to Pakistan in November to study for my Foreign
Ministry exams in December. There was my future, all neat, clean, and laid out
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

75

for me.
My father was evidently looking forward to my return as much as I was
looking forward to going home. "I promise you that I will do everything within my
capacity to make your readjustment to Pakistan short and pleasant," he had
written me. "After that you will swing on your own. Of course you will have to
tolerate my nasty sense of humor. Unfortunately I cannot change my
temperament at this age although I shall try very hard while dealing with my
firstborn. The trouble is that you also have a temper and tears trickle from your
eyes as readily as they come down from my own. This is because we are of the
same blood and flesh.
"Let us make a pact to understand each other. You are a motivated
person. How can a motivated person want the desert to be without heat or the
mountains to be bereft of snow? You will find your sunshine and your rainbow in
your values and in your inner morality. It will turn out to be perfect. Both of us will
work together for a laudable achievement. You bet we will make it."
On June 25, 1977, Mir and I flew to Rawalpindi to join our parents and the
rest of the family, Shah Nawaz returning home from school in Switzerland and
Sanam from Harvard. It was the last time our family would ever be together.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

76

5
REFLECTIO S FROM
AL-MURTAZA:

The High Treason of
Zia ul-Haq
Through the windows of Al-Murtaza I see the February sun glinting on the
guns held by our captors. As our detention drags on into the fourth month, I feel
the house itself is being held prisoner. Heads of state and international politicians
used to come here to visit my father: the Shah of Iran from neighboring Persia,
the ruler of Abu Dhabi and president of the United Arab Emirates Sheik Zayyed,
Aga Khan Prince Karim, Senator George McGovern from the United States,
British cabinet minister Duncan Sandys. My father often organized shooting
parties for his guests, though he didn't really care for hunting. My brothers,
however, were crack shots and occasionally bolstered the guests' egos by
discreetly downing the birds or deer for them.
Even on ordinary days Al-Murtaza was filled with laughter and fun. Often
my father burst spontaneously into song, giving off-key but enthusiastic
renderings of Sindhi folk songs or his favorite tunes from the West: "Some
Enchanted Evening" from the musical south Pacific, which he'd seen in New
York, "Strangers in the Night," the Frank Sinatra hit which had been all the rage
in Karachi during his courtship of my mother, and his specialty, "Que Sera, Sera."
I could still hear him singing it—"whatever will be, will be, the future's not ours to
see. ..."
Who could have foreseen the dark future which overtook him so suddenly
in the early morning hours of July 5, 1977, the military coup d'etat which began
our own personal tragedy and the agony of Pakistan?
"Wake up! Get dressed! Hurry!" my mother called out sharply, rushing
through my room to wake my sister. "The army's taken over! The army's taken
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

77

over!"
Minutes later I nervously joined my parents in their bedroom, not knowing
what was going on. A coup? How could there be a coup? The Pakistan People's
Party and the opposition leaders had reached a final settlement over the
contested elections the day before. And if the army had taken over, what military
factions were staging it? General Zia and the Corps Commanders had come to
see my father two days before to personally pledge the army's loyalty to him.
My father is on the phone, placing calls to his chief of army staff General
Zia and the federal ministers. The first call to come through is from the home of
the education minister. The army has been there already. "The soldiers beat my
father and took him away," sobs the daughter of Hafiz Pirzada, who had left my
father just a few hours ago after celebrating the agreement with him. I had seen
the glow of their cigars and heard their laughter on the lawn while I gossiped
inside with my sister. "Stay calm," Papa is telling Pirzada's daughter in a steady
voice. "Retain the dignity of your family." In the midst of his next call, to the
governor of the Frontier, the phone goes dead.
My mother's face is deathly pale. Papa found out about the coup, she
whispers to me, from a policeman who saw the military forces beginning to
surround the prime minister's residence. Risking his life, he had snuck through
the ranks and inched his way to the front door on his stomach. "Tell Mr. Bhutto
the army is coming to kill him!" he had urgently told Urs, my father's valet. "He
must hide quickly! Hide!" My father had evidently taken the message calmly. "My
life is in God's hands," he had told Urs. "If the army is going to kill me, they'll kill
me. There is no point in hiding. Nor in any of you resisting. Let them come." The
policeman's warning, however, probably saved all our lives.
"The prime minister wishes to speak to the chief of army staff," my father
is saying on Sanam's phone, the private line on which she speaks endlessly to
her friends. Miraculously, the line is still intact.
Zia takes the call immediately, astonished that my father has found out
about the coup.
"I'm sorry, sir, I had to do it," Zia blurts out, making no reference to the
peaceful agreement just concluded. "We have to hold you in protective custody
for a while. But in ninety days I'll hold new elections. You'll be elected prime
minister again, of course, sir, and I'll be saluting you."
Now my father knows who is heading the coup. His eyes narrow as Zia
tells him he can be taken anywhere he wants, to the prime minister's rest house
in nearby Murree, to our own home in Larkana, anywhere; Zia would like the
family to stay at the prime minister's residence in Rawalpindi for a month. The
army will come for him at 2:30.
"I will go to Larkana, and my family will return to Karachi," my father says.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

78

"This is the residence of the prime minister. As it appears that I am no longer the
prime minister, my family will be gone by nightfall."
My father's face is grim when he hangs up. When he lifts the receiver to
place another call, Sanam's line, too, is dead.
My brothers, Mir and Shah Nawaz, rush into the room, having hurriedly
dressed.
"We must resist," Mir says.
"Never resist a military coup," my father says quietly. "The generals want
us dead. We must give them no pretext to justify our murders."
I shudder, remembering the coup and assassination two years before of
President Mujib and almost his entire family gathered at his home in
Bangladesh. The Bangladesh army was the breakaway Pakistani army of
yesterday. Why should that army act any differently from ours?
"Zia has instigated the coup," my mother tells my brothers, filling them in
on the little we know. "Asghar Khan and the other PNA leaders have been
arrested. So have Ministers Pirzada, Mumtaz, Niazi, and Khar. Zia says he is
going to try Asghar Khan for treason and won't spare Niazi and Khar. He says
he'll hold elections in ninety days."
"He'll do all that and hold elections in ninety days?" says Shah, who at
eighteen is more politically astute than the rest of us who have been away for
years at school abroad. More unanswerable questions hang in the air. Why has
Zia singled out these political leaders for arrest? Is it a cover-up? Are they in fact
in cahoots with him? We try to absorb the bits of information, to make sense out
of a world where suddenly there seems to be no sense.
Why had Zia waited so long to launch the coup? The agitation had petered
out in April. The talks with the PNA had been successfully completed just a few
hours ago.
"Zia miscalculated," my father says. "He thought the talks with the PNA
would break down and he would have a pretext to take over. He struck before the
formal agreement could be signed."
"God knows what will happen to us," my mother says quietly. She goes
into her dressing room, opens her safe, and returns with some money. "You're
already scheduled to leave for Karachi early in the morning," she says to my
brothers, giving them the money. "Benazir, Sanam, and I will join you there. If we
don't arrive by evening, leave the country."
It is almost 2 A.M. We wait for the army's arrival to take Papa away. None
of us wants to leave the bedroom to get ready for our own departures. We are
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

79

still unsure of what lies ahead. Was General Zia waiting for all of us to return
home to Pakistan so the whole family could be wiped out together? Such
macabre thoughts. I try to push them away, but I can't. Two of President Mujib's
daughters had survived the massacre, being out of the country at the time. One
had gone on to become the leader of the opposition. Did the Pakistan army not
want to make the same mistake with us?
My brothers, sister, and I had all flown home separately, Shah from school
in Switzerland, Sanam from Harvard, Mir and I from Oxford. Our parents did not
permit us to travel together for fear of an accident. "Thank God you've completed
your education and are home," my father had greeted me just ten days ago.
"Now you can help me."
I had moved into an office near his at the prime minister's secretariat,
taken the Official Secrets Act oath, and begun summarizing the contents of some
of his files, making my own observations in the summaries. How much could
change in a week. In hours.
My mother turns on the radio, looking for any news, though it is rare to
have any broadcasts at such an early hour. There are none. As we continue to
wait for the army, my father seems almost relieved. "The burden of responsibility
is off my shoulders," he says. "Government is a trust and I upheld it faithfully.
Now the burden is no longer on me."
We sit numbly on the sofa in my parents' bedroom while my father calmly
follows his customary routine of reading the files piled high on the table behind
his armchair. One black file he doesn't read at all, but just signs all the contents.
"My first act as prime minister was to commute the death sentences of the
condemned," he says. "My last act will be the same. I always hated reading
appeals for life." I reach to hug him, but he gently pushes me away. "There is no
time for sentimentality," he tells me. "This is a time to be tough."
Two-thirty comes and goes. Three-thirty. No one comes for my father. I
feel increasingly uncomfortable. What is the army planning? Around 4 A.M. my
father's military secretary arrives. His eyes are red and he looks shocked. He has
just come from General Headquarters where he had been summoned by General
Zia, he explains. General Zia regrets that it is not possible for my father to go to
Larkana. If it is not too much of an inconvenience, my father will be taken to the
prime minister's rest house in Murree instead, where he will be held in
accordance with the dignity of his office. Arrangements have been made for a 6
A.M. departure.
"I wonder why they keep changing the plans?" Sanam asks.
"My phone call must have thrown Zia off balance," my father says. "He's
probably wondering if I had time to alert loyalist officers to mount a counterattack
before I spoke to him."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

80

And so we begin the uncomfortable wait again. An hour later, one of our
bearers tells us that the household manager has been awakened and asked to
proceed to Murree to prepare the prime minister's rest house.
"General Zia said they were going to come for me at two-thirty. Now it's six
o'clock. They hadn't even prepared the rest house. They'd made plans for the
arrests of the rest of them, but not for me," Papa says quietly.
The significance of the words sits in the silence of the room.
"The bastard was planning to murder us all in our beds," Shah whispers to
me.
"Go and pack," my mother tells my brothers. "Your flight leaves at seven
o'clock." We tune in to the BBC early morning Urdu report to hear the bare news
that the army has taken over the government of Pakistan.
"You are my student of world government," my father says to me. "Do you
think Zia will hold elections?"
"Yes, I do, Papa," I tell him, still full of student idealism and academic
logic. "By supervising the elections himself, Zia will be able to deprive the
opposition of any claim they were rigged and the pretext to start new agitations."
"Don't be an idiot, Pinkie," my father says in a quiet voice. "Armies do not
take over power to relinquish it. Nor do generals commit high treason in order to
hold elections and restore democratic constitutions."
Reluctantly I leave my parents' room to pack. My father had prepared us
for the moment when we would leave the prime minister's residence for years,
though I had never thought it would be at the point of a gun. We were not to think
of the residence as home, he had insisted, but as an official government building.
When he was voted out of office, he wanted us to be able to leave the official
residence quickly, unlike his military predecessor Yahya Khan, who had stayed
on for months after he left office. "Don't keep any more here than you can pack in
a day," my father had always told us. But I had broken this cardinal rule. I had
come straight to Rawalpindi from Oxford two weeks before with my accumulation
of books and clothes. I had planned to ship them on to our home in Karachi, but I
hadn't got round to it. I had been too busy working for my father.
I feel totally distracted while I pack, rushing back and forth between my
bedroom and my parents' bedroom to make sure my father isn't taken away
without me knowing. I keep tripping over my Persian cat, Sugar, who senses the
tension and persists in meowing and rubbing herself against my legs. The room
is almost bare when my mother comes in.
"It's eight o'clock," she says, "and the army still hasn't come. The aide-decamp tells us that they're still doing up the Murree rest house. But who knows?
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

81

Thank God the boys were allowed to leave."
Somehow daylight has brought an element of calmness. My own tension
has been eased somewhat by the mundane task of packing. My mother and I go
through the interconnecting door to Sanam's room to find her throwing all her
clothes, pictures, and record albums into her trunk, even her back copies of
Harper's Bazaar and Vogue. "I don't want them touching any of my things," she
says angrily, dressed in jeans and a sweatshirt, her long hair still uncombed.
"Pinkie! Sunny! Come quickly. Papa is leaving," I hear my mother shout
just before nine.
"Jaldi. Hurry! Sahib is leaving!" a turbaned staff member says at my door,
wearing the red-and-white uniform of the prime minister's house. He has tears in
his eyes.
I feel a rush of tears spring to my own eyes. Sanam's eyes are also red.
"How can we say goodbye to Papa looking like this?" I say. "Quickly. I have
some eye drops," Sanam says. We rush to her dressing room and with shaking
hands, put eye drops in each other's eyes. Blinking hard, we run down the white
and gold paneled corridor to the front entrance. I can hear the sound of wailing
growing from the lawn, where the staff has gathered.
Papa is already seated in the prime minister's black Mercedes. As the car
begins to move, Sunny and I rush past the weeping staff to the front porch.
"Goodbye, Papa!" I cry out, frantically waving my arms. He turns and gives a
half-smile as the car sweeps through the gates of the prime minister's residence,
the early morning sun glinting off the prime minister's gold seal of entwined
leaves on the license plate.
My father is taken in a convoy of army vehicles to Murree, where he is
placed under "protective custody," a term coined by Zia to justify the arrest of his
political opponents. He will be held there for three weeks, in the white colonial
rest house built by the British in the hills leading to Kashmir. We had spent
summer holidays there as a family, passing idle hours playing Scrabble on the
colonnaded front porch. Now my father is returning to Murree in the custody of
the army. My father's civilian government has ceased to exist. Once again the
generals are ruling Pakistan.
I should have realized that the coup was final, that my father's first arrest
marked the end of democracy in Pakistan. The Constitution of 1973 was
suspended, Martial Law imposed. But stubbornly I clung to my academic
reasoning and personal naivete that Zia would hold the elections he promised the
country over and over in the next few weeks. "I want to make it absolutely clear
that I have no political ambitions nor does the army want to be taken away from
its profession of soldiering," Zia had announced to the country the morning of the
coup. "My sole aim is to organize free and fair elections which will be held in
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

82

October this year. Soon after the polls, power will be transferred to the elected
representatives of the people. I give solemn assurances that I will not deviate
from this schedule." He was lying.
Martial Law Regulation No. 5: Anyone organizing or attending a meeting
of a trade union, student union, or political party without permission from the
Martial Law administrator will receive up to ten lashes and five years'
imprisonment. Martial Law Regulation No. 13: Criticizing the army in speech or
writing is punishable by ten lashes and five years' imprisonment. Martial Law
Regulation No. 16: "Seducing" a member of the army from his duty to the chief
Martial Law administrator, General Zia ul-Haq, is punishable by death. "No
person shall loot," read Martial Law Regulation No. 6, issued on the day of the
coup. "Maximum punishment: amputation of hand."
To further intimidate the people, Zia unleashed the forces of the religious
fundamentalists. Whether or not to fast during the holy month of Ramazan had
always been the personal choice of Muslims in Pakistan. Under Zia, public
restaurants and food concessions were ordered closed from sunup to sundown.
At the universities, water was shut off in the campus water fountains and even in
the bathrooms to prevent anyone from taking a drink during the fast.
Fundamentalist gangs freely roamed the streets, banging on doors in the middle
of the night to make sure people were preparing sehri, the predawn meal.
Smoking cigarettes, drinking water, or eating in public was punishable by arrest.
There was to be no more personal choice in Pakistan, only the strong arm of the
supposedly religious regime.
Anxious about my father's detention and the darkness overtaking
Pakistan, PPP supporters crowded into our garden at 70 Clifton when we
returned from Rawalpindi. While Mir met with the men, my mother, who was
suffering from her recurring struggle with low blood pressure, sent me to meet
with the women. "Just tell them 'howsla rakho,' keep your spirits up," my mother
told me. "Howsla rakho, howsla rakho," I repeated to one visitor after another,
stumbling in the Urdu which had dwindled during my eight years abroad.
Zia took his campaign to discredit my father to the newspapers. "Bhutto
tried to kill me," "Bhutto kidnapped me," ran the headlines from my father's
political opponents, all of whom were obviously alive and free. "You have to
brace yourself for a smear campaign. It's part of 'Operation Fairplay,'" my father
said dryly in one of his daily phone calls from Murree, referring to the term which
Zia had used to describe the coup. Zia was also cutting the staff at Murree one
by one, "as though that bothers me," my father said.
My father's spirit remained high, as did his sense of humor. "A journalist
phoned today and asked me how I was passing the time," he reported one day. "I
told him I was reading a lot of Napoleon to learn how he had kept his generals in
line when I couldn't control mine."
My father's high spirit helped all of us keep a sense of balance at home.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

83

Rather than feeling depressed, we felt strong, confident, and on top: (A) My
father was alive; (B) the people were supporting him; (C) the PPP was as
popular as ever. While Papa sent Mir off to Larkana to look after his
constituency, Shah and I met with the scores of people who continued to come
daily to 70 Clifton to reiterate their support. A reporter and photographer from our
party newspaper, Musawaat, recorded each session. The next day, Musawaat,
the only paper carrying the PPP point of view, would report what was going on in
PPP circles and debunk the anti-PPP propaganda in the regime-backed papers.
After my father's detention, the circulation of Musawaat swelled
dramatically, from a few thousand to one hundred thousand in Lahore alone.
When the presses couldn't keep up with the demand, clever entrepreneurs
began to sell copies of Musawaat at ever higher prices under the counter in the
bazaars. "Musawaat is selling for ten rupees on the black market," I reported to
my father in delight, ten rupees being more than what the average Pakistani
earned in a day. The circulation figures were even more phenomenal for a
society marked by illiteracy and where the lack of official patronage in terms of
advertisements and distribution restricted sales.
"Zia is coming to see me today," my father phoned on July 15th. In the
photograph in the paper the next day, my father looked grim, his face reflecting
the political situation confronting the country. Zia, in turn, looked guilty, his hand
half-held across his chest, an obsequious smile on his face. "Zia reiterated his
intention to hold elections and to act as an honest referee between the political
parties," my father called to tell us after their meeting. Why did Zia feel it
necessary to tell us he was going to be honest? My father didn't believe Zia was
going to be even-minded and fair. Given the climate of hysteria being created in
the regime's press against my father and the PPP, neither did we.
There were just too many unknowns. For the first time in the history of
Pakistan and its two earlier Martial Laws, public servants had been arrested,
including Afzal Saeed, secretary to the prime minister; Rao Rasheed, adviser to
the prime minister; Khalid Ahmed, deputy commissioner of our home district of
Larkana; Masood Mahmood, head of the 500-strong Federal Security Force;
and many others. What did public servants have to do with politics? What was
the regime up to?
Zia had gone on to state in interviews that the army had "contingency
plans" for a coup, thus admitting that the coup had been planned well in
advance. This indicated that the arrest of the public servants was not a spur-ofthe-moment action, but part of a well-conceived military plan. Who was behind
it? The military plan to concoct slanderous stories in the press about us was also
puzzling. If Zia was planning to hold fair and impartial elections, it didn't make
sense.
Meanwhile, journalists were ringing up 70 Clifton asking for information
about my father, about the PPP, about the elections Zia was still promising to
hold. "Invite them all to tea," Papa suggested. I did. And to my amazement, the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

84

dining room at 70 Clifton was packed, so packed that the air conditioning barely
dented the heat. My cousins Fakhri and Laleh came to help, as did Samiya and
her sister Salma. I was very nervous as I tried to answer the journalists'
questions. But one shocked me completely.
"Is it true that Mr. Bhutto and General Zia planned this coup together to
bolster Mr. Bhutto's popularity?" a journalist asked over tea and samosas.
"Of course not" was all I could think of to say, recalling the fear and
uncertainty of that night. But when I repeated the story to PPP visitors the next
day, I was even more surprised to learn that this was a widespread rumor,
apparently spread by the army to confuse our supporters and defuse hostility to
the military takeover. That rumor, and many others, persisted.
In a country like Pakistan where literacy rates are low, rumor and bazaar
gossip often substitute for the truth. No matter how illogical, rumors gain a force
of their own, even among the educated upper classes. "Is it really true that you
carry a miniature videotape camera in your handbag to film meetings with
political leaders?" an old schoolfriend asked me one day. I couldn't believe it.
"How on earth could a camera film through a handbag?" I asked her. "Oh, I
didn't think of that," she conceded. "I read it in the newspaper."
Even the particularly heavy summer rains, which began two weeks after
the coup, were blamed on my father. "The fundamentalists are spreading the
story that Bhutto Sahib caused the rains as revenge for his overthrow," a PPP
visitor told me. Some people probably believed the rumor, looking for some
explanation for the flooding that washed away homes and destroyed crops. But
not in the underprivileged section of Lahore, a bastion of PPP support, which
was particularly hard hit by the floods.
"Go to Lahore as a gesture of solidarity with the people who have suffered
during the rains," my father told me from Murree. "The flooding there has been
devastating."
Go to Lahore on my own? I had never been on a party assignment before.
My stomach churned with nervousness. "Announce your program in Musawaat
and take Shah with you," my father told me. Within twenty-four hours Shah and I
arrived in Lahore.
Hundreds of PPP supporters greeted us at the airport shouting PPP
slogans in spite of Martial Law Regulation No. 5, which threatened those
attending or organizing a political meeting with five years' imprisonment. The
crowd was so enthusiastic that Shah and I had difficulty making our way through
the supporters to reach our car. My eighteen-year-old brother and I were both
overwhelmed by the unexpected demonstration. We were just the prime
minister's children, not political figures.
The crowds were even bigger at the bungalow of Begum Khakwani, the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

85

president of the Women's Wing in Punjab, where the people spilled out of her
huge gardens into the street. Shah and I were soon sweating profusely from the
crush in the reception room and blinded by camera lights as people took endless
photographs of us. In the middle of the reception, I was called to the phone. "It's
Prime Minister Bhutto," the message rippled around the hushed crowd.
"Chairman Bhutto is calling."
Scores of people crowded into the living room with me. "How are you?"
my father asked, unaware of the reception Shah and I were receiving. When I
told him about the hundreds of people at the airport and now here in Lahore, he
was very pleased. "Give them a message from me," he told me. When I hung up
the phone, I turned to the expectant crowd. "My father sends his condolences to
all those who have suffered the loss of home and crops," I stumbled along in
Urdu. "The PPP calls for relief assistance to the affected families."
In the face of the obvious support for my father and the PPP, Zia moved to
show the popularity of the PNA. The detained leaders of all parties, he
announced in the middle of July, could now receive visitors. But his gamble didn't
work. Bigger and bigger crowds gathered every day outside the prime minister's
house in Murree to see my father, while the detention houses of the opposition
leaders were ignored. Quickly Zia fabricated a reason to cut short his losses.
"Due to misuse, the right of the people to visit political leaders in detention is
revoked," the chief Martial Law administrator proclaimed on July 19th.
The coup was not going according to Zia's plan. Traditionally, the people
of Pakistan had deserted any leader who had fallen from power and transferred
their support to the perceived winner and new leader. But in this instance, Zia's
overthrow of my father was backfiring. Instead of deserting my father, the
people's loyalty was returning a hundredfold. When Zia released my father and
the other political leaders three weeks after the coup, millions, literally millions of
people violated Martial Law to greet my father as he visited the major cities of
Pakistan. No crowds in the West ever come close to the size of Asian crowds
under any circumstances. But even by our standards, my father's crowds were
overwhelming.
He had returned first to Karachi, where his progress through the massive
crowds was measured not in city blocks, but in inches. What was normally a halfhour trip from the train station to our home took my father ten hours. His car was
dented and scratched by the time it arrived at 70 Clifton. My brothers, sister, and
I didn't dare go outside the gates to greet him for fear of being crushed. Instead,
we went up on the roof to watch his arrival. And though we had seen
impassioned crowds before, we'd never seen any crowd like this one. So many
people were straining to see him, to touch him, to get close to him that the
twelve-foot cement wall surrounding our house collapsed under their weight.
"Oh, Papa, I'm so glad you're free," I told him when we all gathered in my
mother and father's bedroom that night.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

86

"Free for the moment, anyway," my father said.
"Zia wouldn't dare arrest you again," I said. "He's seen the size of the crowds."
"Don't," my father cautioned me, moving his finger in a circle to show me that the
room was probably bugged.
I pressed on stubbornly. "Zia is a coward and a traitor. He has committed
high treason!" I said loudly, hoping my words were being picked up, foolishly
believing that my father's massive support would protect him.
"You are being careless," my father said to me sharply. "You are not in the
democracy of the West now. You are home under Martial Law."
The shadow of Martial Law became darker when all of us accompanied
my father on a visit to our hometown of Larkana. Once again the crowds turned
out to welcome my father home, giving me a sense of false security and adding
to my joy of having my father back with the family. As we gathered in my
parents' bedroom at Al-Murtaza, everything seemed familiar and normal. But it
wasn't. One of my father's relatives came in with a message from a senior
bureaucrat in Islamabad. The regime, the bureaucrat said, was preparing to
implicate my father in a case of murder.
Murder? A chill ran around the room. My mother and father looked at each
other for a second in silence. "You should start making arrangements now for the
children to return to school abroad," Papa told my mother. "All their papers and
bank books should be in order. God knows what will happen." She nodded in
agreement as Papa turned to me. "Pinkie, you, too, should think seriously about
leaving Pakistan for a while. Take graduate courses abroad if you want until the
situation here is resolved." I looked at him numbly. Leave Pakistan? I had just
arrived home.
"The servants, too, may face hardship," my father continued. "No one is
safe under Martial Law." In the morning, he summoned the staff. "There may be
suffering ahead for all of you," he said. "If you would like to leave our employ now
and return to your villages until the trouble passes, I will understand. I may not be
able to offer you my protection under General Zia." Not one of the staff chose to
leave. Nor did I. And my father moved on to Lahore.
Jiye, Bhutto! Jiye, Bhutto! The crowd in Lahore, the capital of Punjab and
the stronghold of the army, was estimated at three million, the largest turnout
ever in Pakistan. There was no way Zia could politically diminish my father's
support. And a second message came in. "Sir," an intelligence officer said,
slipping into the former chief minister's house where my father was staying,
"General Zia and the army are determined to kill you. They are torturing the
public servants under detention to prepare a false case of murder against you."
The officer was trembling. "In God's name, leave the country, sir," he begged my
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

87

father. "Your life is at stake." But my father was not one to give in to threats or
terrorist tactics. "I may not be free for long" was the only hint he gave of this
latest message when he phoned home from Lahore that night.
When he returned to 70 Clifton, the political meetings went on nonstop.
Zia had scheduled the elections for October 18th, and allowed one month of
campaigning, due to start September 18th. While my father met downstairs with
party leaders, I was in the upstairs dining room being tutored in Urdu. "You need
to brush up on your Urdu," my father had told me. "I may need you to speak for
me." Every day for two hours in August, I pored over Urdu-language
newspapers and learned the language of politics from the tutor. "How's she
doing?" my father would say, coming to the door of the dining room during
breaks from the political meetings downstairs.
In late August, I flew with my father to Rawalpindi. Hoping to prevent huge
turnouts like the ones my father had drawn at the railroad stations in Karachi
and Larkana, Zia had issued a military order forbidding politicians to travel by
train. In Rawalpindi, he had taken the extra precaution of ordering military
patrols to block all approaches to the airport. But many people managed to
evade the barricades, lining the route to the airport and thronging around the
car.
While our car was being mobbed in Rawalpindi, Bashir Riaz, a journalist
and PPP supporter, was in Karachi alerting my mother to yet another threat to
my father. "I beg of you, tell Bhutto Sahib to leave the country," Bashir Riaz said
to my mother. "One of Zia's confidants who is a friend of mine told me to forget
Bhutto Sahib, that he will never come back to power. 'Zia has decided to execute
him on a murder charge,' he told me. He offered to buy my loyalty with a blank
check, but I refused."
Zia tightened his noose, for the first time extending it to me. The next day
in Rawalpindi I attended a tea at the Khokhars, a large family of PPP
supporters, which around one hundred women attended. "Say a few words," the
three Khokhar sisters urged me, two of whom were PPP officials and the other,
Abida, one of my mother's former secretaries at the prime minister's house.
"Howsla rakho," I told the assembled women in my memorized two-minute
speech in Urdu. "Keep your spirits up." When I left, I was surprised to see a
large contingent of police, including policewomen, waiting outside the gates.
"They are here because of you," one of the sisters told me.
I was even more surprised later that night to be served with a notice from
General Zia, the chief Martial Law administrator, signed, if I remember correctly,
by General Arif, warning me not to indulge in political activities. Just a month
and a half into Martial Law, I had received my first official warning from Zia. But I
didn't take it at all seriously. "Imagine," I laughed to my father, slipping into his
bedroom. "They consider me a threat to Martial Law for attending a tea." "It's not
a laughing matter," my father said quietly. "Martial Law is a deadly and
dangerous business."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

88

And the deadly business escalated. It was obvious to everyone by then
that there was no way the opposition was going to defeat my father's Pakistan
People's Party fairly at the polls. Two weeks before the campaigning was to
begin, Zia sent his agents to arrest my father again.
4 A.M., September 3, 1977, 70 Clifton, Karachi.
I am asleep in my bedroom when I hear the loose step on the stairway
creak. As it is the fast of Ramazan, I think it is one of the staff bringing me the
predawn meal. Instead five men suddenly burst through my door, dressed all in
white. I recognize them immediately as commandos of the Pakistan army with
their crew cuts and strong physiques. How often I had seen them on duty at the
prime minister's house. But why are they in plainclothes?
They point their machine guns at me while a sixth jumps around the room,
sweeping everything off my dressing table, yanking my clothes off their hooks,
throwing my books off the bookshelves, smashing my table lamp, and ripping the
wires out of the telephone on my bedside table.
"What do you want?" I ask, terrified. Men never come into the room of a
Muslim woman like this. "If you want to live, keep quiet," says their leader. He
and his team move to the door, leaving my room in a shambles. "Are you going
to kill my father?" I ask the man who had jumped around my room. For a second
he seems to take pity on me. "No," he says, after a moment's hesitation. Then his
face hardens. "If you know what's good for you, don't move," he says, waving his
pistol at me. And he slams my door and is gone with the others.
Quickly I throw on some clothes over my T-shirt, snatching anything out of
the pile on the floor. My sister rushes into the room in a panic. "Don't! Don't!
Where are you going? They're going to kill all of us," Sanam cries.
"Keep quiet," I snap at her. "I have to get to Papa."
I rush out of the room followed by Sanam to find the hall swarming with
army commandos all dressed in white clothes and waving their guns around.
Immediately they herd us downstairs into the reception hall, where there are
even more commandos. I bolt for the front door to cross the compound to the
small annex where my brothers live, but the commandos surround me and
force me at gunpoint to sit on the sofa with my sister. The men are ordered to
stand in pairs in front of all the doors leading into the room, their guns raised.
I have to get to my father. He is in danger. I must reach him. The
commandos had chosen to break into our house in the middle of the night,
without wearing their uniforms. It was all so unnecessary. My father could have
been taken away quietly anytime with an arrest warrant or a Martial Law order.
Instead they were trying to intimidate and insult us. What were they up to?
Perhaps they didn't want the people to know what they were doing to my father.
But I was determined they weren't going to keep it from his daughter.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

89

"Kya aap fauji hain?" I ask the men at the kitchen door in Urdu. "Are you
soldiers?" They look at each other, but in keeping with military discipline, do not
answer. I take a deep breath. "Look at these soldiers," I say loudly in Urdu to my
sister. "How can they be so besharam, so shameless. It was their prime minister,
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who brought them back from the camps of India where their
generals had left them to rot. And this is how they repay him, by entering his
home and violating its sanctity?"
Out of the corner of my eye, I see the men glance at each other nervously.
"Yeh kis ka ghar hai? Whose house is this?" one of them asks. I suddenly
realize some of them don't even know where they are—or why. "Don't you know
you have forced your way into the home of the prime minister of Pakistan?" I ask
them scornfully. Sheepishly they lower their rifles. There is my chance. Quickly I
dart up the stairs and into my parents' room. Nobody stops me.
Papa is sitting on the edge of the bed. My mother is still against the
pillows, the covers pulled up to her chin, the earplugs she wore so her sleep
wouldn't be disturbed by Papa coming to bed late in her hands. Commandos
with drawn weapons surround them. The man who had jumped around my room
destroying things is now jumping around my parents' room, trying to wrestle my
father's crossed ceremonial swords off the bedroom door. "What are you
doing?" my father is saying to him quietly when I come into the room. My father's
voice never loses its ring of authority and the man immediately stops.
My father motions me to sit down next to him. In an image that seems
particularly grotesque, a fat thug of a man is lolling on one of my mother's
delicate blue-and-white brocade Louis XV chairs. "Who is he?" I whisper to my
father. "Saghir Anwar, director of the Federal Investigation Agency," he tells me.
"Do you have an arrest warrant?" my father asks the FIA director. "No," he
replies awkwardly, looking down at the carpet. "Then under what charges are
you taking me from my home?" my father asks. "I am following orders to take
you to military headquarters," Anwar says. "Whose orders?" my father asks.
"General Zia's," the man replies.
"Since I was not expecting you at this hour, I will need half an hour to get
ready," my father says calmly. "Send for my valet to pack my clothes." Saghir
Anwar refuses, saying that no one is permitted to see the prime minister. "Send
for Urs," my father quietly repeats. And Anwar motions to one of the commandos.
Urs, I find out later, was being held at gunpoint with the rest of the staff in
the courtyard. "Be quiet! Hands behind your backs!" the commandos had yelled
at them in English. Those who hesitated, not understanding English, were pistolwhipped. Their money was stolen, along with their watches.
"Who is Urs?" asked the commando who had been sent from the house. "I
am," Urs replied, and was smashed on the head with a pistol butt for speaking.
Farcically, the commando then went down the whole row, asking each if he was
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

90

Urs. After several shook their heads no, he came upon my father's valet, who
had learned by then just to nod. Urs was grabbed by the throat and feet and
carried bodily upstairs, where, at gunpoint, he packed my father's clothes. When
he took the bags to the waiting unmarked car, six commandos kept their
automatic weapons leveled at his head and chest.
Upstairs my father takes a shower and dresses. I can't get over his
composure. What a greater weapon that is than the cowardly arsenal of guns
being held all over our house. "Stay behind!" one of the commandos yells at me
when I start to walk downstairs with my father. I ignore them. They let me pass.
Downstairs Sanam and Papa exchange glances. "You shameless
cowards," my normally shy sister shouts at his captors as he is taken toward a
car. "You shameless cowards."
Once again I watch my father being driven away, not knowing where he is
being taken, not knowing if I will ever see him again. I waver for a moment, half
my heart breaking, the other half turning to ice. "Pinkie," I hear a voice call. I turn
to see my brother Shah Nawaz lined up with the staff in the courtyard. "Usko
chorol Leave him!" I shout at the soldier holding him. I am frightened myself at
the new tone in my voice. But the soldier steps away.
Back inside the house, my mother's face is white as chalk. Her blood
pressure has dropped even further and Shah Nawaz, Sanam, and I take turns
massaging her feet to stimulate circulation. I try to phone for a doctor, but the
lines have been cut. I plead with the guards at the gate to let me fetch her doctor,
but that, too, is to no avail. Only when our majordomo arrives at 70 Clifton in the
morning and, eliciting the sympathy of a Sindhi guard, manages to find out what
has happened does the word get out about my father's arrest at all. Dost
Mohammed races around Karachi for hours on his motor scooter, alerting the
party leaders and my brother Mir at Al-Murtaza, our relatives, the media—and my
mother's doctor. But when Dr. Ashraf Abbasi comes to the gate, she is refused
entry. A regime-approved doctor finally arrives at noon to give my mother the
injection she so desperately needs.
An army colonel arrives in the afternoon with a blank paper. "General Zia,
the chief Martial Law administrator, has ordered that you and your mother sign
this," says the colonel, who is dressed in battle fatigues with the name Farooq
written on his green-and-brown shirt. I refuse. "I'll make you sign it," he threatens
me, his beady eyes becoming beadier and his little mouth more cruel. "You can
kill me, but you can't make me sign it," I say in my new tone of voice. "Even your
General Zia can't make me sign it." "You don't know what's good for you," he
says in a clear and deadly voice. And he turns and walks away.
At 5 P.M. the army is finally withdrawn from the house. Immediately Shah
Nawaz and I rush to the PPP office, where already fear is setting in among some
of the party officials. While some members call for a nationwide protest strike
and other demonstrations, the party bigwigs call for restraint until contact is
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

91

made with my father. Contact with my father? Who knows how long that will
take?
My mother's news the next day is even worse. She has talked to my
father's lawyer. The secret warnings my father had received were true. The
charge against my father, now, is conspiracy to murder.
Murder? I didn't even know whom my father was being accused of
conspiring to murder.
A minor politician named Ahmed Raza Kasuri who was still very much
alive, my mother explained to me. Someone had ambushed the car he and
several members of his family were traveling in three years before near Lahore.
Kasuri's father, a retired magistrate, had been killed. But Kasuri, a member of the
National Assembly elected on the PPP ticket, claimed he had been the real
target. The politician, who had since joined the opposition, was known to have
many enemies, and was said, unbelievably, to have survived fifteen prior
attempts on his life. In the Lahore attempt, he had said he suspected my father's
involvement and filed a report with the police. Such was the freedom then in a
democratic Pakistan that the police had filed the report against the prime
minister. The resulting inquiry by the High Court had cleared my father of any
connection to the crime and the whole sorry incident had been forgotten.
Until 1977. Kasuri had rejoined the PPP and had even applied for a PPP
ticket to Parliament in the March elections. After the PPP had decided to offer
the ticket to someone else, Kasuri had evidently decided to refile charges
against my father. Now, two weeks before the new election campaign was due to
begin, Zia had used the old charge against my father to arrest him. But once
again, Zia's ploy backfired.
The justice who heard the charges found the material on record
"contradictory and incomplete," and saw no reason to believe my father guilty of
the offense. He set my father free on bail ten days after his arrest. Again, I was
optimistic about the future. "If the civil courts have released the prime minister
then I see no reason to detain him under a Martial Law order," Zia commented to
the press.
My father came straight home to Karachi on September 13th, planning to
leave early the next morning with Shah Nawaz to join my brother Mir in Larkana
to celebrate Eid at the end of Ramazan. The pressure was really on now. There
were only five days left before the month of campaigning and my father had
scheduled ninety meetings during the thirty days. As usual, the family gathered
in my parents' bedroom that night, where the conversation took an unexpected
turn.
"You know, Nusrat, it's time for Pinkie to get married," my father said
suddenly as he lay on the bed, smoking a cigar. "I'm going to find her a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

92

husband."
I sat bolt upright on the couch, almost spilling my mother's card game of
Patience.
"I don't want to get married," I protested. "I've just returned home." Sanam
and Shah seized the opportunity to revert to childhood teasing. "You've got to
get married. You've got to get married," they chanted.
"In fact," my father continued, "I've already seen a boy I like."
My mother smiled, probably already planning the wedding. "I don't want to
marry yet, and you can't get me to say yes," I said mutinously to my father.
"You can't say no to your father," Papa said, which Shah and Sanam then
echoed in chorus.
"No. No. No," I said, saved by the arrival of my father's late-night dinner
trolley. Mercifully, the conversation changed. But the new subject was even
more threatening.
"I am told Zia won't spare me and I should escape," Papa said while he
ate. "One of the PPP leaders asked me for money today so he could flee. Go if
you like, I told him, but I'm not a rat who runs. I'm going to stay here and face
Zia."
"And you're going to win the elections and try General Zia for high
treason," I said loudly.
"Be careful, Pinkie," my father cautioned, motioning again to the bugged
walls. But I had forgotten all restraint in my relief at seeing my father out of
prison and home again. On I railed about Zia's treachery until my father got
angry.
"Be quiet," he admonished me sharply. "You don't know what you are
saying."
We stared at each other across the room. In fury and hurt, I stormed out of
the room.
I realize now that he knew just how bad things were going to get, that he
had seen the realities from the beginning that I was trying to deny. He knew just
how ruthless General Zia was and was trying to keep me from making
provocative statements. But I was too headstrong then to see that. How many
times since I have thanked God that he woke me before he left for Larkana.
"Don't take to heart what I said to you last night," he said, sitting on the
edge of my bed. "I just don't want any harm to come to you."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

93

He held me in his arms.
“I understand Papa, and I apologize too," I said to him, kissing him goodbye. I
remember distinctly the sight of his gray shalwar khameez and the scent of
Shalimar. It was the last time I ever saw him free.
3:30 A.M., September 17, 1977, Al-Murtaza—Bahawal, one of the Larkana
staff, recounts what happened, for I wasn't there:
Seventy army commandos and policemen scaled the walls of Al-Murtaza,
clubbing the chowkidars and swarming toward the house.
"Open the door," they yelled, pounding on the front door while I and the
other servants inside held the door closed.
"What do you want?" we called out.
"Bhutto."
"Wait. We must wake him up."
"Open the door," they yelled, leaning all their weight against it until bulged.
Mir heard the commotion and went to wake Bhutto Sahib. "Tell them it's not
necessary to break the door down," his father said to him.
"Allow two officers to enter. I will need time to collect my things." But he
knew they would come. His suitcase was all packed. So was his briefcase.
Bhutto Sahib was taken away ten minutes later. All of us were forced into
the house at gunpoint and locked in. There were security forces posted inside
and outside the house. We wept.
Mir baba was very angry. He tried to call Karachi but the phone lines were
cut. The next morning I slipped through the guards and ran to another house to
call Begum Sahiba. The word had spread by then through the village and
hundreds of people were gathered outside the gates of Al-Murtaza. "Jiye Bhutto!"
they were chanting. "Long live Bhutto!"
The police arrested them.
My father was taken to Sukkur Jail, then to jail in Karachi and then on to
Lahore. Zia didn't dare risk letting the people know where he was. This time Zia
was determined to finish off my father once and for all. Again my father was
charged with the same old murder. But this time, Zia had arranged to make it
stick.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

94

6
REFLECTIO S FROM
AL-MURTAZA:

The Judicial Murder
of My Father

Time, dripping grain by grain through a bottomless hourglass at AlMurtaza. I feel as if I am in a living grave, cut off from all human experience. My
mother passes many of the endless hours of detention playing Patience. But
after five months of being locked up at Al-Murtaza, I am more restless than ever.
I have no idea when and if we'll be released. It all depends on Zia.
The United States government has made its choice. As winter heads
toward spring, it becomes clear that the Americans are opting for Zia's military
dictatorship and not the return of democracy. Prompted by the increasing Soviet
presence in Afghanistan, President Carter offers Pakistan $400 million in aid in
March 1980, but Zia dismisses the package as "peanuts." A growing number of
refugees from Afghanistan are entering Pakistan, an indicator of the flood which
will pour in as the civil war in Afghanistan intensifies. The refugees and the
Soviet troops on our doorstep will result in a cornucopia of foreign aid for Zia,
eventually making Pakistan the third largest recipient of U.S. aid behind Israel
and Egypt. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan becomes known in Pakistan as
"Brezhnev's Christmas present to Zia." And my mother and I remain incarcerated
at Al-Murtaza.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

95

Sanam arrives for a rare and much anticipated visit, surrounded by the
usual retinue of jail authorities and army officers. Even a daughter is not allowed
to visit her mother and sister without the constant presence of the military. My
mother is feeling ill from her continuing low blood pressure and is lying down in
her bedroom. I ask if the meeting can take place there in the presence of the
female officials. As Sanam and I move toward the family quarters, I hear
footsteps behind us. It is not a police matron. It is Captain Iftikhar, one of the
army officers. I stare at him in disbelief. No man, save for a relative, is permitted
to enter the family quarters. Some people in our culture prefer to die than to have
strangers violate its sanctity.
"Even jail rules state that only women police officials can enter a woman
prisoner's room," I remind him.
"I will be present," he says.
"Then we won't have the meeting at all. I'll call my sister."
Sanam had already gone ahead to our mother's room, so I keep walking
down the corridor to the family quarters to tell her and my mother that the
meeting has been postponed. I hear a noise behind me. Captain Iftikhar is still
following me.
"Where do you think you are going? You can't come in here," I tell him,
momentarily stunned.
But he is oblivious. "Do you know who I am?" he says loudly. "I am a
captain of the Pakistani army and I can go where I want."
"Do you know who I am?" I reply just as loudly. "I am the daughter of the
man who brought you back after your disgraceful surrender at Dacca."
Captain Iftikhar lifts his hand to hit me. And the rage I have suppressed,
the anger I have tried to control, erupts.
"You raise your hand in this house, you shameful man! You dare to raise
your hand in this house, near the shadow of the grave of the man who saved
you. You and your army fell at the feet of the Indian generals. It was my father
who gave you back your honor. And you are raising your hand to his daughter?"
He lowers his hand abruptly. "We'll see what happens," he spits out,
turning on his heel and stalking off. Sanam's visit is canceled.
I write a letter to the court where my mother and I had challenged our
arrests as soon as we had been locked up at Al-Murtaza. Under Martial Law in
1979, civil courts were still authorized to review arrests made under military
regulations. I describe what happened in our family quarters. General Zia had
often spoken of the sanctity of Chador and Char Divari, the Veil and the Four
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

96

Walls, meaning the sanctity of family life. Yet neither he nor Captain Iftikhar
seemed to have much regard for it. I give the letter to the jailer, who promises to
forward the letter to the court and gives me a receipt for it. I have no idea at the
time just how valuable that receipt will be.
Cogito, ergo sum—I think, therefore I am. I always had difficulty with that
philosophical premise at Oxford. I am having more difficulty with it as the empty
hours of detention drag on. I think even when I don't want to, but as the days
slowly pass, I am not sure whether I exist at all. To truly exist, a person must
effect something, act and cause a reaction. I feel that I have nothing on which to
leave my imprint.
My father's imprint on me, however, keeps me going. Endurance. Honor.
Principle. In the stories my father used to tell us as children, the Bhuttos always
won a moral fight. "Rupert fell upon me in the forests of Woodstock," my father
would begin the tale of his encounter near Oxford with Rupert of Hentzau, the
evil character in the novels of Anthony Hope. Rising to his feet, my father would
brandish an imaginary sword. "He slashes me in the shoulder, slices my leg. But
I fight back because an honorable man fights to the death." While we watched
spellbound, Papa would parry. He'd thrust. He'd ignore the blood now seeping
from a wound to the stomach. Lunging suddenly, he would finish Rupert off, then
sink exhausted into his chair. "A noble scar," he'd say, lifting his shirt to show us
his appendix scar.
Fortified by this and other Bhutto legacies, I saw no reason after the coup
to believe that my father would not also triumph over Zia. I had not yet made the
distinction between the inspirational challenges my father had made up for us in
his stories and the real evil that awaited him. September 1977. Massive brick
walls jagged with barbed wire. Tiny, high-set windows covered with rusted iron
grilles. Huge iron gates. Kot Lakhpat Jail. The door in the gate rattled and
creaked as I stepped through. I had never been inside a jail before.
I faced another steel wall, this one guarded by police carrying guns. All
around me men, women, and children carrying tiffin boxes of food were pushing
toward the one small door in the blanket of steel. There are no amenities in
Pakistani jails—clothing, bedding, dishes, even food must be brought by the
inmates' families. Those whose families are too poor to supply these "luxuries" or
who have been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment are put in Class C
confinement —group cells where fifty sleep on lice-filled mats on the floor with a
single hole in the corner for their toilet—and subsist on a daily ration of two bowls
of watery lentils and a piece of bread. There are no fans to stir the over 100degree heat, no showers to cool the prisoners or allow them to wash. The police
took me to meet my father in the jail superintendent's office.
"With this recycled murder charge Zia is coming out more openly against
us now. The other children must leave the country quickly, before Zia makes it
impossible," my father tells me. "Especially the boys. I want them out of the
country in twenty-four hours."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

97

"Yes, Papa," I say, knowing that Mir and Shah would hate leaving now.
How could they concentrate on their studies with their father in prison? They
were both working so hard in Larkana and Karachi on the elections Zia was still
promising to hold. . . .
"You have completed your education. But if you want to return to England
and live a safer life, I will understand. You can go," my father continues. "If you
choose to stay here, know that we are in for heavy weather."
"I will stay here, Papa, and help with your case," I tell him.
"You will have to be very strong," he says.
Mir left reluctantly for England a few days later. He was never to see his
father again. Nor was Shah Nawaz, who made the long trip to Kot Lakhpat Jail a
few days before returning to school in Switzerland.
"I have permission to see my father," Shah told the guards inside the first
gate. "I have come to say goodbye to him."
"We don't have permission to admit you," the guards said. "We can't let
you in."
My father, who happened to be passing by the inner steel wall to meet
with his lawyers, overheard Shah arguing with the jailers.
"You are my son. Don't ask them for any favors," he called out loudly to
my brother. "Go for your studies and work hard. Make me proud of you."
Shah Nawaz left two days later for the American College in Leysin. Sanam
left shortly thereafter to return to Harvard. Ten days after that, on September 29,
1977, I was arrested for the first time. People. Swarms of people. Young men in
shalwar khameez clinging to tree branches and lampposts, balancing on the tops
of buses and trucks. Families craning to see from their windows, roofs, and
balconies. People wedged so tightly that anyone who fainted would stay upright.
Women in burqas hovering on the edges of the crowds, daring for this cause to
be seen in public. The daughter of their imprisoned prime minister had come to
talk to them.
A woman standing on a political podium was not as strange to the crowd
as it felt to me. Other women on the subcontinent had picked up the political
banners of their husbands, brothers, and fathers before me. The legacies of
political families passing down through the women had become a South Asian
tradition. Indira Gandhi in India. Sirimavo Bandaranaike in Sri Lanka. Fatima
Jinnah and my own mother in Pakistan. I just never thought it would happen to
me.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

98

Standing on the makeshift stage in the industrial city of Faisalabad, I was
terrified. At twenty-four years, I did not think of myself yet as a political leader or
a public speaker. But I had no choice. "Darling, you have to campaign. We have
to divide up your father's schedule," my mother had said to me the week before
in Karachi. "The other PPP leaders are either in detention or already committed
to their schedules. We are the only ones left."
"But I won't know what to say," I had told her.
"Don't worry," she had said. "We'll give you a speech."
"Bhutto ko reha karo—Free Bhutto!" the masses are chanting, the same
cry a million had raised the day before in Rawalpindi for my mother. I had stood
behind her on the stage, watching, learning. "Do not worry if the father is in jail.
You have the mother, who is still free," she had called out to the crowds. "I do not
have either tanks or guns, but I certainly have the unconquerable power of the
downtrodden to face any power in the world."
Her voice was firm but her hands shook slightly as she rallied the people,
and my heart went out to her. My mother hadn't wanted this public life, hadn't
wanted to assume the leadership of the PPP while my father was in prison. She
was still ill from her low blood pressure and feeling very weak. When the party
leaders squabbling over the chairmanship had proposed her as a compromise
candidate, she had refused. But after my father had written her from prison to ask
her to accept the party decision she had had to accept. The first promised
elections were only two weeks away. And the people were more than ready to
welcome back the PPP.
Zia's "Operation Fairplay" was turning out to be anything but fair for the
vast majority of the population. Less than two months after the coup, Zia's regime
returned the flour and rice mills my father had nationalized to their original
owners, and promised further denationalization. Industrialists throughout the
country were celebrating by firing union organizers. Fifty thousand workers in
Lahore alone were laid off. "Where's your Father Bhutto now?" the industrialists
taunted the workers who had lost the only job security they had ever had.
Other workers were threatened with massive dismissals and wage cuts.
Peasants looking to sell their crops for guaranteed prices were offered "take-it-orleave-it" prices instead. Once again the feudals and the factory owners were
pocketing the profits, onions now selling for five times the 1975 price, potatoes
for twice as much, eggs and flour up by 30 percent. The outrage at the reversal
of my father's policies was being shouted at PPP rallies all over Pakistan. Bhutto
ko reha karo! Bhutto ko reha karo! Free Bhutto! In Faisalabad, I clutched the
speech which I had practiced over and over in my room in Islamabad. Look up.
Don't look down. Speak to the back of the room. What a tidy technique that had
been at the Oxford Union. Stretching in front of me now in a sports field was a
mass of humanity with no boundaries. "Don't antagonize the junta and give Zia
any pretext for canceling the elections," my mother had cautioned me. But the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

99

crowds were irrepressible. "I can't believe it," a local party worker said, mopping
her brow. "I've never seen such a big public meeting in my life."
Somebody handed me the microphones, which were connected to the
loudspeakers with ungrounded wires. Sparks were crackling and flying off the
wires. While I spoke, the people on stage tried to wrap cloth around the wire or
hold the microphones for me. No. This was not the Oxford Union.
"When I was in India with my father during the negotiations with Indira
Gandhi, my father refused to sleep in his bed but slept on the floor," I called out
in my own contribution to my prepared speech. " 'Why are you sleeping on the
floor?' I asked him. 'I cannot sleep in a bed in India,' he answered, 'when our
prisoners of war have nothing to sleep on in the camps but the ground.'" And the
roar rose.
Kasur one day. Okara the next. Past the rolling green fields where farmers
bent to weed and water. The PPP was cutting a swath through the agricultural
heartland of the Punjab, our progress on the roads slowed by cheering crowds.
The Punjab was the home of the army jawans, the rank and file who were
devoted constituents of my father's. He had treated the jawans with simple
decency, issuing warm clothing for the soldiers lying in the winter trenches of
West Pakistan, raising their pay, offering them greater opportunities for
promotion to the rank of officer. Now the families of the soldiers were turning out
in force to support us. We were getting too close to Zia's quick.
"The magistrate is here to see you," said my hostess nervously when I
arrived in Sahiwal on September 29th, the third stop on my tour.
"This house has been declared a sub-jail. You are detained for fifteen
days," the magistrate told me.
I couldn't believe it. The house was surrounded by the police. The phone
was cut off, as was periodically the water and electricity. The roads to the whole
neighborhood were cordoned off, keeping the residents from their homes. My
host and hostess, who subsequently left the party, were detained with me. I
spent three days pacing up and down my bedroom in a fury, a policewoman
posted in the hallway outside.
What were the charges? I hadn't broken any law, even a Martial Law. I
was merely standing in for my father during the month of campaigning
sanctioned by Zia himself. How little I understood then about the high-stakes
game I had been drawn into. "My daughter is used to wearing jewelry. Now she
will be proud to wear the chains of imprisonment," my mother said at a campaign
rally in Karachi where the size of her crowds swamped previous records. The
tremendous turnouts we were receiving dashed Zia's hopes of politically
defeating the PPP. Bhutto in jail was even more powerful than Bhutto on the
campaign trail.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

100

The next day, Zia announced on television that the elections were
canceled.
From that moment, I knew there were no more laws.
October 24, 1977. The day my father's trial for conspiracy to murder
began. Unlike ordinary murder cases, which started in the lower courts, this one
started in the Lahore High Court, depriving my father of one right of appeal. The
justice who had released my father on bail six weeks earlier had been removed
from active duty in the High Court, and a bench of five specially selected judges
had been set up. One of the first acts of this new bench was to cancel my father's
bail. Now he was being held under criminal charges and under orders of the chief
Martial Law administrator, Zia ul-Haq.
At least I was free to continue working with my mother on my father's
behalf, having been released from my detention shortly after the elections were
canceled. A party supporter loaned us an unfurnished house in Lahore, the
capital of the Punjab, to use as an office and meeting place for the PPP during
my father's trial. Every day one of us attended the court hearings in the
handsome building built by the British in 1866. The trappings of justice were
everywhere in the carved wooden-ceilinged courtroom with its rich, red carpet.
Everyone stood as the judges entered, preceded by a bearer wearing a long
green coat and a white turban and carrying a wooden scepter topped with a
silver knob. The judges, wearing black robes and white wigs, took their places in
five high-backed chairs under a red satin tasseled canopy. My father's lawyers
were already in court, dressed in black silk gowns over their black jackets,
starched white shirts with winged collars, and morning suit trousers. Sitting with
the other onlookers filling the rows of wooden benches in the courtroom, I should
have felt comforted. It looked like a trial being held in the finest traditions of
British law. It wasn't.
The case against my father rested primarily on the confession of Masood
Mahmood, the director general of the Federal Security Force. Masood Mahmood
was one of the public servants who was arrested soon after the coup and who
we had been told was tortured to give false evidence against my father. After
almost two months of detention by the military, Masood Mahmood had decided to
become an "approver," a witness who claims to be an accomplice in a crime and
is pardoned on the promise that he will tell the "truth" about the other
participants. Now Masood Mahmood was claiming my father ordered him to
murder the politician Kasuri.
Masood Mahmood's statement was the only testimony directly linking my
father to the alleged conspiracy. The other four "co-accused" were also members
of the FSF who allegedly took part in the attack and who took their orders from
the director general. Like Masood Mahmood, they had all been under arrest
since shortly after the coup. There were no eyewitnesses to the attack.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

101

While the four accused members of the FSF sat next to their lawyers, my
father was surrounded by intelligence agents and kept behind a wooden dock
constructed just for this trial. "I know you are used to a very comfortable life, so I
am providing you with a chair instead of a bench," the Zia-appointed acting chief
justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussein said sarcastically to my father on the first day of
what was to be a five-month trial. One of Zia's top judicial appointees, Maulvi
Mushtaq was from Zia's home area of Jullandar in India, and was an old enemy
of my father's. He was the judge who had tried my father during his challenge to
Ayub Khan. During the PPP government he had been passed over for the post of
chief justice and denied promotion to the Supreme Court after the law minister,
the attorney general, and my father all deemed him unfit. And shortly after the
coup he accepted Zia's appointment as chief election commissioner, making a
mockery of the separation between the executive and judicial branches of
government. He could hardly be impartial.
The court's bias was clear. On the first day of the trial, Mian Abbas, one of
the FSF accused and a good and brave man, stood up and denied his own
testimony. "My confession was extracted from me under torture," he announced.
The next day he did not appear in court. He was ill, the prosecution explained.
The defense requested copies of the witnesses' statements against my
father. The request was deferred by the chief justice "until some appropriate
time." As the trial progressed Mr. D. M. Awan, the chief defense counsel, was
called into the chief justice's chambers, where he was advised to "think about his
future." When Mr. Awan persisted in mounting a legal defense of my father, the
chief justice retaliated by giving unfavorable rulings in Mr. Awan's other cases
being heard by the court. Finally, Mr. Awan advised his clients to find another
lawyer.
I was present when Maulvi Mushtaq misrepresented the testimony of
Masood Mahmood's driver, trying to establish a link between my father and the
director general of the FSF. "Is it true that you took Masood Mahmood to see the
prime minister?" the chief justice asked.
"No," the frightened driver replied.
"Write: 'I drove Masood Mahmood to see the prime minister,' " Maulvi
Mushtaq directed the court stenographer.
"Objection, my lord!" the defense lawyer said, rising.
"Overruled!" Maulvi Mushtaq snapped, his heavy white brows gathering in
anger. Then he turned to the witness. "What you meant to say is that you don't
remember, but you may have driven Mahmood to see the prime minister," he
said.
"No, sir. I didn't drive him," the driver responded.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

102

"Write: 'Masood Mahmood drove himself to see the prime minister,' " the
chief justice instructed the stenographer.
"Objection!" the defense lawyer said again, rising.
"Sit down!" roared Maulvi Mushtaq. He turned back to the driver. "Masood
Mahmood could have driven himself to see the prime minister, couldn't he?" he
asked.
"No, sir," the driver said, shaking.
"Why not!" shouted Mushtaq.
"Because I had the keys, sir," quivered the driver.
John Matthews, QC, a lawyer from England who came to attend the trial in
November, was shocked by the proceedings. "Particularly I was concerned at the
way a witness's favorable answer would be the subject of immediate interruptions
from the bench, who would take over the case and cause him to whittle down or
change his answer," he told an English journalist later. The defense lawyers were
even more concerned. At the end of the trial, not one of the objections they had
raised or the contradictions in the evidence they had pointed out appeared in the
record 706 pages of testimony.
There wasn't even a pretense of impartiality. When I arrived at court one
morning, I overheard the FIA deputy director Abdul Khaliq briefing a group of
witnesses on what they were to say during their testimony. "What sort of justice is
this?" I protested loudly. People began to gather. "Take her away," Khaliq
ordered the police. "I will not go," I shouted, quite willing to create a scene to
embarrass the prosecution. "Take her!" Khaliq yelled again. As the police moved
toward me, the murmur began to run down the corridor that my father was
arriving from prison. I didn't want my father to be upset at the sight of his
daughter being bullied and pulled from the court, so I withdrew from the
confrontation. Later I heard that the prosecution had rented a house near the
court, complete with good food and drink, to polish the testimony of the
witnesses.
Ramsey dark, the former attorney general of the United States, came to
observe my father's court proceedings. Later he wrote an article about it in The
Nation. "The prosecution case was based entirely on several witnesses who
were detained until they confessed, who changed and expanded their
confessions and testimony with each reiteration, who contradicted themselves
and each other, who, except for Masood Mahmood (the Director General of the
FSF), were relating what others said, whose testimony led to four different
theories of what happened, who were absolutely uncorroborated by an
eyewitness, direct evidence, or physical evidence," he wrote.
I believed in justice. I believed in laws and codes of ethics, sworn
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

103

testimonies, and judicial process. But there were none during the farce of my
father's trial. The defense got hold of an army log book showing that the jeep
allegedly used during the attack on Kasuri was not even in Lahore on the day in
question. "The travel log has not been proved correct," the prosecution objected,
though they themselves had submitted the log to the court in their papers relating
to the case.
The defense produced FSF travel vouchers showing that Ghulam
Hussein, the officer who had supposedly organized and supervised the murder
attempt, was in Karachi on another assignment on the day it took place. In fact,
the vouchers revealed, he'd been in Karachi for the ten days prior to and the ten
days following the attack as well. "Those documents were intentionally falsified,"
the prosecution back-pedaled, though no mention of this had ever been made
before by them or any of the "confessing accused."
Irrefutable evidence that the whole murder case had been fabricated came
when my father's lawyers obtained a copy of the ballistics report on the actual
shooting. The positions the "assailants" claimed to have fired from did not match
the bullet holes in the car. There had been four assassins, not two, as the
regime's approvers had claimed. Moreover, the FSF guns which the "confessing
accused" claimed to have used in the murder attempt did not match the empty
cartridges found at the scene! "We have won the case!" Rehana Sarwar, the
sister of one of my father's lawyers and a lawyer herself, said to me jubilantly in
the courtroom.
I rushed to tell my father during the tea break, wasting no time. While the
"confessing accused" were allowed to chat with their families in the courtroom for
as long as they liked, my father was often hustled off to a little room in the back
under heavy police guard. "Papa, we've won! We've won!" I said to him, telling
him about the ballistics report. I'll never forget the look of kindness on his face
while he listened to my excitement. "You don't understand, do you, Pinkie," he
said gently. "They are going to kill me. It doesn't matter what evidence you or
anyone comes up with. They are going to murder me for a murder I didn't
commit."
I looked at him dumbstruck, not believing him, not wanting to believe him.
None of us in the room, including his lawyers, wanted to believe him. But he
knew. He had known since Zia's soldiers came for him in the middle of the night
in Karachi. "Flee," his sister had begged him when she had first heard rumors of
the impending murder charge. Others, too, had urged him to leave. His answer
had always been the same as it was now. "My life is in God's hands, not anyone
else's," he said to me in the tea room. "I'm prepared to meet God whenever he
calls me. My conscience is clear. What is most important to me is my name, my
honor, and my place in history. And I am going to fight for that."
My father knew that you can imprison a man, but not an idea. You can
exile a man, but not an idea. You can kill a man, but not an idea. Zia was blind to
that, and was trying to send another message to the people. Look at your prime
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

104

minister. He is made of flesh and blood like any ordinary man. What good are his
principles to him now? He can be killed just as you can be killed. See what we
are doing to your prime minister? Imagine what we can do to you.
My father tried to tell me what lay ahead. But I heard his words as if from a
great distance. And I kept them there. Otherwise, I could not have gone on to
fight the one new charge after another being brought against him. The fight to
save his honor became my own. On the day after my father was arrested in
Karachi, Zia issued Martial Law Order 21. All members of the National Assembly,
senators, and members of the provincial governments from 1970 to 1977 (the
years of the Pakistan People's Party) were required to submit financial
statements to the military regime detailing all properties and purchases, from
land holdings, machinery, and jewelry to insurance policies and office supplies.
Failure to comply: seven years' rigorous imprisonment, confiscation of the
property.
If the military regime deemed that the properties and assets were acquired
through political influence or that government property had been misused, the
guilty party would be disqualified from any elected or appointed political post.
Arbitrarily choosing whom to disqualify, the Martial Law authorities used
the new law to threaten parliamentarians into acquiescence before the military
regime. The only avenue of appeal open to victims of disqualification was a
tribunal set up by the same regime which had disqualified them in the first place.
Of course, those who cooperated with the regime were miraculously requalified.
Heading the first list of disqualified politicians was my mother, although
she had been a parliamentarian for only three months. She had to make
repeated appearances before the tribunal, where the regime found it difficult to
frame any charges against her. Her hearings had to be postponed time and
again. But the biggest target in the fall and winter of 1977 was my father, whose
reputation Zia wanted desperately to discredit.
Bhutto used government funds to buy motorcycles and bicycles for
People's Party workers. Mr. Bhutto had his houses at Larkana and Karachi air
conditioned at government expense. Mr. Bhutto used our embassies abroad to
purchase dishes and clothing for his personal use with official funds. The regime
heaped charge after charge of corruption, misappropriation of funds, even
criminal charges against my father, knowing that he would find it hard to refute
them from his prison cell, and having taken the precaution of jailing his personal
secretary. But my father's filing system proved to be a formidable opponent for
Zia in the sixty-plus cases now facing us.
Everything we needed to refute the charges against my father I found in
his papers in Karachi. Day after day I waded through the family accounts, rushing
copies of what was needed to my father's lawyers, receiving new instructions on
what to look for next in return. My father had kept a record of every single
expense, right down to the receipt for $24 worth of cloth bought on a trip to
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

105

Thailand in 1973, or $218 worth of Italian wallpaper paste from 1975. I was
astonished to discover that he had even paid for his own reading glasses,
although health care was provided free to the prime minister. But our refutations
of the charges never appeared in the newspapers, only the charges themselves.
We mimeographed the refutations on our own machines and distributed them
among the people.
We also put together a pamphlet, later bound as a book, called Bhutto:
Rumor and Reality, in which the rumors against my father were outlined and then
contrasted with the reality. Producing the pamphlet was a risky business, since
any positive literature on my father was regarded as "seditious" by the regime,
and those printing or distributing it were likely to be jailed and the material
confiscated. The refutations were useful for both Pakistani and foreign
journalists, who were flooded with the regime's propaganda against my father
and the PPP. But there was always something more to do.
"We've got to send out a call to the people for a strike, for demonstrations,
for something," I said in frustration to the party leaders who came to our rented
house for secret meetings at night. But timidly they demurred. "Don't do anything
until we have a party line," they kept repeating. I was impatient with their apathy,
as were the other young members. "Let's go to the mazaars to pray," I
suggested, believing the regime which was pounding Islam-Islam-Islam into
everyone's heads wouldn't dare arrest us while we prayed at the tombs of our
saints. The idea took hold. PPP workers began to gather in mosques and
mazaars all over the country to read the Holy Quran and pray for my father's
release. But I was wrong. The regime came down with a heavy hand even at the
mazaars.
And the arrests and floggings continued, totaling seven hundred by
December 1977. The case of Khalid Ahmed, the deputy commissioner of
Larkana, indicates what the regime must have done to Masood Mahmood and
the other civil servants arrested after the coup to give false evidence against my
father. Two army men came to Khalid Ahmed's house in Lahore with a written
order from Zia, Khalid Ahmed's wife, Azra, told me. "If I don't call you tomorrow,
you'll know something is wrong," he told her as he was taken away. There was
no call. When she finally located him in a prison in Islamabad a month later, she
almost wished she hadn't. "I cannot forget that day," she told me. "His face was
ashen, his lips dry and cracked. There was white spittle caked around his mouth.
He had been given electrical shocks in his delicate parts. They wanted him to
give evidence to use against Mr. Bhutto in court."
Khalid was held for five months in solitary confinement. Every evening
Azra went to a public garden with a view of the prison terrace. "He was allowed
to exercise for half an hour a day," she said. "I sat on a bench for hours just to
catch a glimpse of him, to make sure he was still alive."
Khalid Ahmed's life, and probably the lives of many others, was saved by
a petition my mother filed in the Supreme Court shortly after my father's first
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

106

arrest, challenging the legal authority of Martial Law to detain him. In November
1977, the Supreme Court upheld the legality of Martial Law, declaring it to be a
"law of necessity" in keeping with a Quranic law which permitted a Muslim to eat
pork to survive if no other food was available. But the Supreme Court made it
clear that Martial Law was valid only for a limited period, the nine months quoted
by the regime as the time needed to organize free and fair elections.
The justices also ruled that superior civil courts would continue to have the
power of judicial review over the actions taken by the military courts. Without this
provision of civil review, thousands of people, including political activists and
public servants arrested after the coup, would not have been able to appeal for
reviews of their detentions. Though the appeals, including my own appeals
during my own detentions, took many months to reach the bench, at least there
was some hope of relief through the civil courts at that time.
The High Court released Khalid Ahmed in December 1977 because there
wasn't a shred of evidence against him, not even an arrest order. "We had orders
from higher up," the army officers said. But just as the regime had gone around
every court decision to rearrest my father, they now did the same to Khalid. A
week after his release, the former commissioner was warned by a friend that he
was about to be rearrested under Martial Law Order 21 for the misuse of a
government car and an air conditioner. An air conditioner! "I begged him to
leave," Azra said, her eyes filling with tears. Her husband left that night for
London. The cases are still pending against him, forcing him to remain abroad.
Azra has raised their two children alone. The persecution of this family, and
many others, was just beginning in December 1977. Two weeks later, it
escalated sharply. Tear gas. Screaming. People running. A wrenching pain in my
shoulder. "Mummy, where are you? Are you all right? Mummy!"
December 16, 1977. The anniversary of the army's surrender to India.
Qaddafi Stadium, Lahore. My mother and I decide to go to a cricket match to
take our minds off the trial. We have tickets to the women's enclosure, but when
we arrive we find one gate after another locked. We enter the only one open. As
we are spotted the applause and cheers of the spectators begins. But the cricket
players suddenly run off the field. There are policemen kneeling three deep
where the cricket teams had been.
Whoosh. Something heavy hurtles past my face.
"Tear gas! Tear gas!" I hear the screams beginning.
The people panic, rushing toward the locked gates. I can't breathe, can't
see. I begin to suffocate in the poisonous clouds billowing toward us. Can lungs
catch fire? My shoulder! I almost fall from the blow. All around me in the murk are
police clubbing people to the ground.
"Mummy!" I call out. "Mummy!"
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

107

I find her bent over the iron railing of the stands. She lifts up her head at
my voice. Blood is streaming from a gash in her scalp.
"The hospital. We've got to get my mother to the hospital," I scream.
"No," my mother says quietly. "First we are going to see the Martial Law
administrator."
The blood is streaking down her face, dropping in red rivulets to her dress.
We move through the crowd and find a car. "Take us to the Martial Law
administrator's house," my mother says. The security at the gate is shocked to
see us and lets us in. As my mother gets out of the car, the general's jeep pulls in
behind us.
"Do you remember this day, General?" my mother confronts Iqbal, Zia's
appointed Martial Law administrator of the Punjab. "On this day you surrendered
to the Indian army at Dacca and today you have shamed yourself again by
shedding my blood. You do not know the word honor, General, only dishonor."
He looks at her, stunned. With great dignity my mother then turns and gets
back into the car. We drive straight to the hospital, where it takes twelve stitches
to close her wound.
That afternoon I am arrested at home. My mother is arrested in the
hospital.
The next day Zia appears on television to congratulate the Punjab
administration for its handling of the incident. And my father is removed from the
court for saying "damn it" when he tries to find out what happened to us. "Take
him away until he regains his senses the chief justice says. The next day my
father files a petition for mistrial. The petition is denied.
Locked up in our unfurnished house in Lahore, with my mother in the
hospital, I saw clearly for the first time the lengths to which Zia would go to crush
our spirits. There was no doubt in my mind that the attack on us at the cricket
match had been premeditated. The police had locked the gates themselves to
force us to walk into their barrage of tear gas and bamboo rods. The implications
were enormous. Women had never been singled out for punishment or harass .
We were entering a period unheard of in Pakistan. Those day locked up alone in
Lahore among mimeograph machines and type writers were dark ones indeed.
Within a week my mother joined me in detention, her scalp held together
by stitches. What is happening, we kept asking each other in disbelief. Are we
really witnessing what we are witnessing? Our minds just weren't prepared to
absorb it. But that, I'm sure, is what sustained us throughout. Every new atrocity
brought another shock—and a new burst of determination. From anger I moved
on into defiance and resolve. They think they can humiliate me? Try it, I
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

108

remember thinking.
I spent my first New Year's back in Pakistan in sub-jail. Just a year before
I'd been home from Oxford at Al-Murtaza and had actually met Zia on my father's
birthday. Now my father was spending his birthday in prison. My mother and I
checked off each day of our fifteen-day detention order, my mother passing the
time playing Patience and occasionally watching the television set we left on just
to hear voices.
My scheduled visit with my father came and went, making me very sad. It
always cheered me to see him, and to take away the instructions he wrote out for
me on the yellow legal pads he had stacked in his cell. I thought his cell was bad
then, with its dirt floor and poor running water. Little did I know that there were far
worse cells awaiting him.
The authorities had lodged him next to a group of mentally disturbed
prisoners who hooted and howled all night. They also made sure he heard the
other political prisoners being lashed in the courtyard, sometimes inserting
microphones into their mouths. But the regime couldn't break him. "My morale is
high," my father assured me during one of my visits to his prison. "I am not made
of the wood which burns easily." The fires of outrage were burning outside the
prison, however, where in early January 1978 the regime committed its first mass
murder. Before my mother and I were arrested, the PPP had called for a Day of
Democracy on January 5th, my father's birthday. At the Colony Textile Mill in
Multan, the workers who were striking for the bonuses they had received in the
past but which had been cut back by their industrialist owners were planning to
use the date to demonstrate. They never got the chance.
Three days before the Day of Democracy, the army locked the gates to
the mill, got up on the roof, and fired into the workers trapped below. It was
among the worst massacres the subcontinent had seen. We were told hundreds
died. Nobody knew how many. Some said two hundred, others three hundred.
Bodies kept popping up for days, in fields, in gutters. Zia had put the members of
the working class who formed the backbone of PPP support on warning: Cower
down or be massacred.
The Day of Democracy turned out to be one of the worst days of
oppression. Thousands of PPP supporters were arrested all over the country.
And the brutalization of the country deepened.
Lashes were administered to anyone saying "long live Bhutto" or "long live
democracy." Lashes were administered to anyone displaying a PPP flag. They
were administered quickly, often within an hour of the sentence, because
appeals were still being heard then by the civil courts. In Kot Lakhpat Jail, the
prisoners were spread-eagled and tied with thongs to the whipping rack. Doctors
were called in to check the pulses of the victims so the whippings would stop
short of death. Often the victims were revived by smelling salts so that the
prescribed number of lashes, usually numbering ten to fifteen, could be
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

109

completed.
Public lashings outside of jail were also becoming more frequent. Instant
judgments and punishments from mobile military courts were meted out by a
single Martial Law officer who toured the bazaars deciding whether the
merchants were cheating on weights, overcharging, selling inferior goods. In
Sukkur, one officer demanded that a man, any man, be handed over. "We need
someone to lash," he said. The stall keepers didn't know what to do and finally
led the officer to a man suspected of selling sugar on the black market. Though
the "crime" was being committed by almost everyone in the bazaar, the man was
promptly—and very publicly—lashed.
Nothing in my life had prepared me for such barbarity. The whole
framework of society as I had known it in America and England, and as
experienced by those living in Pakistan under the Constitution of 1973, was
vanishing.
On the day our detention ended, the gates opened to let the magistrate
in—but not to let us out. Instead he handed us a new detention order for another
fifteen days. Another legal precedent shattered. Under my father's civilian
government, orders for preventive detention had been extremely restricted. No
one could be detained for a cumulative, not consecutive, period of three months
within a year, and the courts heard petitions within twenty-four hours. Now a new
and terrible history of Pakistan was being written.
Released. Detained. Externed. Detained. Throughout my father's trial the
regime used its arbitrary powers to keep my mother and me off balance,
releasing and rearresting us so constantly that any kind of planning was
impossible. During those first few months of 1978, I was detained and restricted
repeatedly. Even the regime didn't seem to know if I was coming or going.
In the middle of January my mother and I were released from our
detention in Lahore. I flew immediately to Karachi, where I had been ordered to
appear by the income tax authorities. The charge? To list the assets and
liabilities of my grandfather, who had died when I was four years old. I wasn't
even an heir and not liable to answer questions relating to my grandfather's
estate under any civil or military law. But that didn't matter to the authorities.
Failure to comply, the notice had insisted, would result in an automatic ex parte
decision against me. I arrived at 70 Clifton at midnight.
Bang! Bang! I shot out of bed at 2 A.M. "What is it?" I called out in the
panic that had never really left me since the commandos had burst into my room
four months before. "The police have surrounded the house," Dost Mohammed
called to me. I dressed and went downstairs.
"We have booked you on the 7 A.M. flight to Lahore," the officer said. "You
are externed from the province of Sindh."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

110

"Why?" I asked. "I just got here to answer the charges your regime
brought against us."
"General Zia is planning to take Prime Minister Callaghan of Great Britain
to a cricket match," the officer told me.
For once, I was speechless. "What does that have to do with me?" I
asked. "I didn't even know there was a cricket match."
"The chief Martial Law administrator doesn't want any trouble. You may
decide to go to the match, so he has ordered your externment," the officer said.
At 6 A.M. I was driven to the airport under police guard and put on a plane to
Lahore. Why couldn't I just be restricted in Karachi for the day?
Two days later I was having lunch with friends in Lahore when the police
surrounded that house. "You are being detained for five days," the arresting
officer told me. "Why?" I asked again.
"It is the anniversary of Data Sahib's death," the officer said, a fact I well
knew, Data Sahib being one of our most revered saints. "You may decide to go
to his tomb."
Back I went into detention with my mother. She played Patience while I
paced the floors. Our mail was stopped. Our phone was cut off. When I got out in
early February I went immediately to see my father. Because of all our
detentions, I had missed three precious meetings with him. But I wasn't missing
any court sessions.
Though the chief justice had assured the world press that the trial would
take place "in the full light of day," the courtroom was closed to all observers on
January 25th, the day after my father had begun his testimony. The world had
been invited to hear the prosecution. But no one was to hear the defense.
Disgusted with the court's bias, my father had already withdrawn his lawyers.
Now he declined to testify at all, sitting silently through most of the rest of the
proceedings. The chief justice from the Punjab took advantage of the in camera
proceedings to reveal his racial prejudice against Sindhis, the race from the
southernmost province of Pakistan to which my father belonged. Both my father
and the PPP high command called for retrial on the basis of his bias—to no avail.
While I helped with the case, my mother had been visiting different cities
in the Punjab, including Kasur where she had prayed at the shrine of the Muslim
saint Buba Bullah Shah. "I want you to go to Sindh," my father told me in Kot
Lakhpat Jail. "You and Mummy have both been spending all your time in the
Punjab. Get the PPP activists to arrange a tour."
I was apprehensive as I prepared to go from Karachi to Larkana on the
pretense that I was going to pray at the graves of my ancestors. My mother sent
me a cautioning note in Karachi. "DON'T abuse or criticize Zia, but concentrate
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

111

on issues like high prices. You must be there to hold the flag and run the party,"
she wrote from Lahore after returning herself from a secret trip to Multan to
comfort the families of the workers massacred at the textile factory. She sent me
the names of families to visit whose members had been arrested and the
amounts of money to give them, depending on the number of children they had.
"If the worker is the only earning member, take his address so that we can send
money to the family every month until the release," she wrote me, then
concluded: "You should go in the Mercedes. It is strong and reliable with a fast
pickup. All my love, Your Mummy."
Musawaat announced my departure and the cities en route. And on
February 14th, off I went on my first Sindh tour, taking with me a speechwriter, a
reporter, and a photographer from Musawaat. Begum Soomro, the head of the
Women's Wing of PPP Sindh, came as my chaperone.
Tatta, where Alexander the Great rested his troops. Hyderabad, where
ancient roof windcatchers funneled cooling breezes into the houses below. Huge
crowds thronged our car along the way. Public political gatherings had been
banned by Zia, so we held ours within the four walls of the biggest family
compounds we could find. Standing on the roofs of one compound after another,
I looked down at people packed into the courtyards like sardines. "My brothers
and respected elders," I yelled down to them at the top of my lungs, microphones
and loudspeakers having been forbidden by the regime. "I bring you salaams—
greetings—from Chairman Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. The crime against him is a crime
against the people." Therparkar. Sanghar. Whenever possible I also addressed
bar associations and press clubs, always speaking of the illegality of the regime
and the injustice meted out to my father and the PPP.
As I was leaving Sanghar, army trucks suddenly cut off the car from the
front and the rear. We were escorted to the house we were to stay in for the night
at bayonet point.
"You are not to continue your trip," the district magistrate told us.
"Where are your orders?" I asked him. "I want to see it in writing."
He had none.
"The regime has just sent him to frighten us," said Makhdoom Khaliq, a
PPP leader traveling with us. "Let's go on." The next day we set out for
Nawabshah, where the meeting was to be the biggest of all. But as the car
reached the Khairpur-Nawabshah border we found the road blocked by security
forces. This time they came with papers.
I was externed from Nawabshah to Karachi on February 18th and
forbidden to leave the city. Once again I missed my fortnightly meeting with my
father.
March 1978.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

112

"I have learned from a Zia source that the Lahore High Court will sentence
Bhutto Sahib to death," a journalist in Karachi told me. Mechanically I passed the
news on to my mother in Lahore and to the PPP chiefs of Sindh and Karachi,
though I myself didn't want to believe it. But the signs were everywhere.
Three criminals, not political prisoners, were sentenced in early March to
be hanged in public in Lahore. Hanged in public! The newspapers gave the news
wide coverage, as did the television. The hangings were to take place on public
grounds and they were being advertised like the opening of a play. Two hundred
thousand people showed up to watch the gruesome spectacle, the men dangling
from the gallows wearing black hoods. I realize now that the regime was
psychologically preparing the country for a death sentence for my father. But
then I just took it as an extremely ominous sign. All I could remember was the
campaign promise of Asghar Khan during the election campaign just a year
before: "Shall I hang Bhutto from the Attock bridge or from a lamppost?"
The momentum was building toward the court decision. Soldiers in
plainclothes were deployed at all government buildings and banks. Armored cars
full of soldiers began to patrol Rawalpindi. In Sindh, trucks with machine guns
mounted on them rolled through the streets. And a began of PPP members,
guilty of nothing but the government's anticipation that they might make trouble
when my father's sentence was announced. The charge read: "Since you, ___,
are likely to incite trouble on the announcement of verdict in Bhutto's trial you are
hereby detained. ..." How did the regime know what the verdict would be if the
courts were independent and the trial fair, as Zia claimed?
Eighty thousand arrested from the Punjab, thirty thousand from the
Frontier Province, sixty thousand from Sindh. Incomprehensible numbers. So
many people arrested that the regime opened detention camps all over Pakistan.
Race courses were converted into open-air prisons, open fields with no facilities
were surrounded by barbed wire and patrolled by armed personnel, sports
stadiums were turned into temporary jails. Even women were being arrested,
some with their infants.
March 15, 1978—Kishwar Qayyum Nazami, wife of a former member of the
Provincial Assembly:
My husband and I were arrested at 1 A.M. The police cordoned off the
whole house. Our baby was only a few months old, so I had to take him with me
to jail in an open military truck. At Kot Lakhpat Jail the administrators said there
were no facilities for women political prisoners. They finally locked me in a tiny
storage room with six other ladies, including Rehana Sarwar, the sister of one of
Mr. Bhutto's lawyers, and Begum Khakwani, the president of the Punjab
Women's Wing. "Why have we been arrested?" Begum Khakwani asked the
police. "Because the decision is about to be reached on Bhutto," the policeman
said. "How do you know the decision is going to go against Mr. Bhutto?" she'd
asked. The policeman had said nothing.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

113

We were searched roughly by the matrons, who took my wedding ring and
my watch. When I was released they said they'd lost them. There was no toilet in
the room, just a pile of bricks in the corner, and no bedding. We couldn't have
slept anyway. The police started lashing the political prisoners in the next
courtyard at midnight. Lines were painted on the men's backs to show the
number of lashes to be administered. The man who whipped them, a wrestler
who wore a loincloth and greased his body, ran toward the men from a distance
to gather strength while an army officer sat on the side and counted the strokes.
Twenty to thirty men were whipped in each session. We could hear their screams
all night long. "jiye Bhutto!" they shouted every time the lash landed. "Long live
Bhutto!" I covered my ears and prayed my husband wasn't among them. He had
already been lashed in September 1977.
The second morning of our imprisonment, the police suddenly released
us. As we hurried out of the gate, we were rearrested, this time on charges of
endangering "law and order." The regime must have realized that it didn't look
good to have arrested us on charges that presupposed the court's decision
would be "guilty." And we were returned to the storage room.
Mr. Bhutto, whose cell we could see from own, found out we were there,
and had his lawyer bring us a basket of fruit. "See how Zia treats women from
respectable families," his note read. I was returned to house arrest two weeks
later because my baby got very ill in prison and I had no medicine. The other
women didn't get out for a month.
My own detention orders came in three days after theirs, in the early hours
of March 18th. "The police are here to see you," came the all-too-familiar
message at 4:30 A.M. I knew why, but I didn't want to know. I wanted to run to my
mother, but she was already in detention in Lahore. I wanted to run to my father.
I wanted to run anywhere, to Samiya, to the lawyers, to Mir or Shah Nawaz or
Sunny. I couldn't take this alone. I couldn't. My God, help us all, I said over and
over to myself, pacing through the empty house.
The wailing began in the late afternoon. I could hear it coming from the
kitchen, from the garden, from the gate to 70 Clifton. My heart speeded up until I
thought it would explode. Suddenly the front door burst open and my cousin
Fakhri threw herself on the entrance hall floor. "Murderers!" she screamed,
banging her head on the floor in her grief. "Murderers!"
Zia's judges had found my father guilty and sentenced him to death.
Fakhri, who had rushed past the startled army guards at the gate, was served
with her own detention order within the hour. She would be detained with me for
a week. I would be detained for three months. Iron gates, one after another. Long
dirty passageways in between. Police matrons searching me, going through my
hair, running their hands over my arms, my chest, my shoulders. Another iron
gate. Then three small cells with iron bars in the doors.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

114

"Pinkie? Is that you?"
I peer into the cell, but I am blinded by its darkness. The jail authorities
open the door and I step inside my father's death cell. It is damp and fetid. No
sunlight has ever penetrated its thick cement walls. The bed covers more than
half of the tiny cell, and is bolted to the ground with thick iron chains. For the first
twenty-four hours my father was in the cell, he was chained to the bed. His
ankles still bear the scars. Beside the bed is an open hole, the only toilet
provided for condemned prisoners. The stench is nauseating.
"Papa!"
I embrace him, my arms easily encircling his body. He has lost a
tremendous amount of weight. When my eyes adjust to the light, I see that he is
covered with insect bites. Mosquitoes breed in the heat and dampness of his cell.
No part of his body is without angry red swellings.
I feel tears welling in the back of my throat. I swallow them down. I will not
let myself cry in his presence. But he is smiling. Smiling!
"How did you get here?" he is saying.
"I filed a petition with the provincial administration saying that as a family
member I was being prevented from my rightful weekly visits to you under the
Jail Manual," I tell him. "The home secretary gave me permission to see you."
I tell him how I was brought to Kot Lakhpat Jail in a convoy of army trucks,
cars, and jeeps. "The regime is very nervous," I tell him, bringing him up-to-date
on the riots that had brought curfews to villages throughout Sindh since the
announcement of his death sentence less than a week before. One hundred
twenty had been arrested in a mud hut village of 146 near Larkana. The police
had also detained a shopkeeper who had kept my father's picture on the wall
next to that of a movie star.
"The number of countries that have appealed to Zia for clemency is
incredible," I tell him. "I hear it all on the BBC. Brezhnev has written a letter, as
has Hua Kuo-feng citing the close cooperation you forged with China. Assad has
appealed from Syria, Anwar Sadat from Cairo, the president of Turkey, the Saudi
government. Indira Gandhi. Senator McGovern. Practically everyone, with the
exception of President Carter. A unanimous resolution was adopted in the
Canadian House of Commons appealing to the regime to commute your death
sentence and 150 members of the British Parliament are urging their government
to take steps. Greece. Poland. Amnesty International. The secretary-general of
the United Nations. Australia. France. Papa, there is no way Zia can go through
with this."
"That's heartening news," he says. "But there will be no appeal from us."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

115

"But Papa, you must appeal," I say, shocked.
"Through Zia's courts? This whole process is a farce. Why prolong it?"
As we talk, he motions with his head for me to come closer. The jailers are
just outside the cell door, listening, looking. I feel a piece of paper being pressed
into my hand.
"Papa, you can't just give up," I say loudly to distract the jailers.
"My God knows that I am innocent," my father replies. "I will file my appeal
in his court on the Day of Judgment. Now go. The hour is almost up. Go when
you decide, not when they do."
I hug him. "The paper must not fall into the hands of the authorities, or
your visits will be canceled," he whispers rapidly into my ear.
"Till we meet again, Papa."
I was searched on the way out of the prison. Nothing was found. I was
searched for the second time when I was taken to see my mother in detention in
nearby Lahore, and again after I left her. Nothing was found. Sometimes the
searchers were sympathetic, merely going through the motions. But I never knew
until the moment. At the airport, to be flown back to my own detention in Karachi,
I was made to sit under guard for three hours in a car, surrounded by a convoy of
other military vehicles.
Finally, the plane was ready. I could see through the car windows that the
passengers were all aboard. The engines were turned on. The headlights shone
down the runway. The police got me out of the car and started walking me
rapidly, always rapidly, toward the steps, one in front, one in back, guns drawn. A
two-way radio crackled. And suddenly they reversed themselves and headed me
back toward the car.
I can still see her fat body as she waddled toward me on the tarmac that
night, her arms akimbo. I knew her all too well, an airport security woman who
always seemed to be on duty when I flew in and out of Lahore and who was so
unsympathetic I suspected the regime had deliberately planted her to search me.
She looked mean, like the sort who took rings and watches during the searches
and never returned them. Nothing was too small for her to search. She emptied
lipsticks out of their cases, and studied every page of my appointment diary. She
enjoyed her work.
"I will not be searched by her. I will not be searched!" I yelled, backing
away from the car into the circle of guns surrounding me. "I was searched going
into jail to see my father. I was searched coming out. I was searched going to
see my own mother in detention and searched coming out. I have been
searched enough!"
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

116

The convoy of military vehicles pulled into position around me. More guns.
More police. "You have to be searched again," the police officer insisted.
"Otherwise, you won't be allowed to leave in time for the plane."
"That's fine with me," I screamed. "What do I have left? You've sentenced
my father to death. You've broken my mother's head. You've sent me to live
alone in Karachi, my mother to live alone in Lahore, put my father in a death cell.
We can't even speak to each other, comfort each other. I don't care whether I live
or die. So do what you will!"
I was almost hysterical. What other option did I have? I was up against the
wall. The security woman hovered in the background, frightened by my outburst.
But if she searched me she would surely find my father's message.
"Come, come, let her be," the men began to murmur.
"You can go," the officer said.
On the flight to Karachi, I was near collapse. My ear ached for the first
time. Click. Click. The noise was so irritating that I found it hard to sleep when I
returned to 70 Clifton. The regime finally called in a doctor, who began to
conduct tests.
I read the piece of paper from my father. It was advice to me on points to
make in contesting my illegal detention. I tried to write out a draft for the court,
but I felt too ill.
The animals. It was strange what was happening to our family's animals.
On the day my father's death sentence was handed down, one of his poodles
died. One minute he was perfectly all right. The next he was dead. The following
day the female poodle died, again for no apparent reason. I had a Siamese cat
with me at 70 Clifton. She died too, on the third day.
When there is danger to the master of a house, some Muslims believe, the
animals sometimes deflect it and they die instead. All I could think of as I lay ill
was that the danger to my father was so great that it had killed not one, but three,
of our pets. The thought was not comforting. Every morning when I turned on the
BBC news at 6 A.M., I prayed I'd hear the bulletin that Zia was dead. But he was
still alive.
I challenged my detention at 70 Clifton, using the pointers from my father.
The court postponed hearing my case in April and again in May. Each time I had
to readmit the petition for a hearing. On June 14th, my lawyer brought me the
best pre-birthday present I could have. There were no grounds for my detention,
Justice Fakhr ud-Din had ruled in the first ruling in a preventive detention case. I
was free. At last I could attend to my health.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

117

I had my first operation for my ear at MidEast Hospital in Karachi at the
end of June. As I came out of the anesthetic all my suppressed fears surfaced.
"They're killing my father! They're killing my father!" I heard myself screaming. My
nose was stuffed with packing and I couldn't breathe, though I felt calmer after
my mother, who was under arrest in Lahore, was finally given permission to visit
me under police escort.
What a sorry world I found when I recovered. The Karachi branch of our
newspaper, Musawaat, had been closed down by the regime in April and its
presses seized. Both the editor and the printer had been arrested for printing
"objectionable material," the term the regime used for our side of the story in my
father's case. Journalists at other newspapers had gone on strike in protest.
Ninety were arrested and four sentenced to lashing, including a senior editor of
the Pakistan Times, who was physically handicapped.
The international community was taking notice. By the summer of 1978,
both the editor of Musawaat and the printer were among fifty political prisoners
"adopted" by Amnesty International, the worldwide human rights organization
which monitors the status of political prisoners. Amnesty was investigating the
cases of thirty-two others— with no help from the regime. Though Zia had
promised his cooperation to two of Amnesty's delegates during a fact-finding
mission to Pakistan earlier in the year, the regime never responded to Amnesty's
report, which was issued in March.
I myself had met with the delegates during their visit in January. I told
them of our concern about the loss of fundamental human rights under Zia's
Martial Law regulations, the trying of civilians and political prisoners by military
courts, and the "cruel punishments" being meted out, including the amputation of
the left hand of a right-handed person or the right hand of a left-handed person
convicted of theft. I was also anxious to have them understand the unfairness of
my father's trial and told them of the inhuman conditions under which he was
being held in solitary confinement. Naturally, they wanted to verify it. The
delegates requested permission to visit my father in jail. The request was denied.
April 28, 1978, Kot Lakhpat Jail, Dr. Zafar Niazi, my father's dentist:
When I visited Mr. Bhutto in Kot Lakhpat Jail in April, I found his gums
were rapidly deteriorating. The conditions in the prison were unsanitary and his
diet inadequate. The subtissue in his gums was inflamed and painful, but there
were no facilities for me to give him any treatment. I'm not sure any treatment
would have been effective, however, if he were to remain in these subhuman
surroundings. I issued a report to the regime after my visit, stating that I could not
be effective as Mr. Bhutto's dentist, unless his conditions were improved. I knew
the regime would not take kindly to such a report. Many of my patients were
foreign diplomats, and the regime was concerned, I am sure, that I would share
my findings with them. As a precaution, I gave a copy of my report to my wife. "If
the army arrests me," I told her, "give it to the foreign press." The police came for
me two days later.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

118

The persecution of Dr. Niazi and his family was just beginning. He would
be arrested twice, once while he was treating a patient under anesthesia in his
clinic. "Just give me an hour to finish my patient," he asked the police. But they
refused and he had to leave the patient in the chair. During this first arrest, the
police raided his house at 2 A.M., turning over mattresses, pulling clothes out of
the closets, looking for anything to pin on him. All they found was a half bottle of
wine left behind by an American associate of Dr. Niazi's, an orthodontist who
practiced at his clinic every three months. Dr. Niazi was charged with having
alcohol in his house.
Dr. Niazi, who was not a member of the PPP, or in
held for six months in prison on the alcohol charge. By the
my father had been transferred from Kot Lakhpat Jail to
Rawalpindi Central Jail. Dr. Niazi immediately applied for
father again. His application was denied.

any way political, was
time he was released,
another death cell, in
permission to see my

June 21, 1978, Rawalpindi District Jail, my twenty-fifth birthday.
I sit in a small room at Flashman's Hotel in Rawalpindi, waiting to visit my
father. I keep looking at my watch. Where is my mother? My father's lawyers had
managed to get a court order allowing us to visit my father together on my
birthday. But it's noon, and I have been waiting since 9 A.M. for the police to fly
her in from her detention in Lahore. Once again, they are stalling.
I am worried about my mother. She has been having terrible headaches
and is almost always exhausted. The strain is taking a terrible toll on her and her
blood pressure keeps dropping. Twice when flying from Lahore to see my father
in 'Pindi she has fainted. The lawyers have petitioned the regime to detain her in
Islamabad within driving distance of the prison, but she is still being held in
Lahore. Once more she is alone, her only company a little kitten I smuggled in for
her in my pocket. Chou-Chou is giving her comfort, she says. The kitten puts her
paw on my mother's hand when she lays out her card games of Patience.
I smooth out my shalwar khameez. I want to look smart for my parents on
my birthday to show them my morale is high. 1 P.M. 2 P.M. This is one of the
regime's favorite tricks. I cannot count the number of times in my own detentions
when I have been ready at the appointed hour to be taken to visit my father, only
to wait hour after hour with no word. My visits with him every two weeks help
keep me going. The regime knows that. So they either delay taking me so that I
have only half an hour with him, or don't come for me at all. Why haven't they
come? How can the regime violate a court order?
3 P.M. 3:30 P.M. The jail rules stipulate that all visitors must leave
by sunset. I remember my last birthday. My party on the lawns of Oxford seems
more like ten years ago. I wonder now whether it ever happened at all.
4 P.M. The message that my mother has finally arrived comes from the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

119

airport. "Pinkie, happy birthday!" My mother embraces me when we meet at the
entrance to the jail. Together we begin the walk to my father's cell.
"It was your great good fortune to be born on the longest day of the year,
Pinkie," my father says when we reach him. "Even the regime couldn't make the
sun set early on your birthday."
He is being held now in another dim cell in an interior courtyard of the
prison. Army tents are set up all around the inner courtyard. Military guards are
posted at the locked and barred entrance. What a farce of a civil trial. It's a
military operation. We are in a military outpost.
His dim, damp cell is only six feet by nine feet. There is no gauze netting
over the bars in his cell door, as there is over the guards' doors in the cells next
to his. The air is thick with flies and mosquitoes. A sleeping bat clings to the
ceiling while pale, colorless lizards scuttle up and down the walls.
We look at his bare metal cot. "Didn't they give you the mattress I sent you
two weeks ago?" my mother asks him. "No," he says. My father's back has sores
and bruises from the thin jail bedding. He's had two bad cases of influenza, and
severe stomach problems from unboiled water. On three different occasions he
has vomited blood and bled from the nose as well.
Unbelievably he is quite cheerful, though very thin. But then he always
seemed fine to me. Perhaps I just didn't want to see otherwise.
"I want you to go to Larkana for Eid and pray at the graves of our
ancestors," he is saying.
"But Papa, then I'll miss my next meeting with you," I protest.
"Your mother is still in detention. There is nobody else to go but you," he
says.
I swallow hard. I had never been to our family graveyard on Eid, or to
receive the traditional visits from the villagers and family at the nearby house in
Naudero. The men in the family had always officiated, my brothers
accompanying my father if the end of Ramazan fell during their school vacations.
I felt a shiver of loneliness. I hoped my father would soon be free.
"Go to pray at Lal Shahbaz Qalander," my father also urges me. "I never
got there last Eid." Lal Shahbaz Qalander. One of our most renowned saints. My
grandmother had gone to pray at his shrine when my father became very ill as a
baby and nearly died. Would God be able to hear a daughter's prayer for the
same person?
We sit in the courtyard for a precious hour, our heads close together so
that the three jailers assigned to listen to us cannot. But they are sympathetic this
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

120

time and do not press in on us.
"You are twenty-five now," my father jokes, "and eligible to stand for office.
Now Zia will never hold elections."
"Oh, Papa," I say.
We laugh. How do we manage? Somewhere in the jail stand the
hangman's gallows which shadow our lives. The army, my father tells us, is trying
to bait him into an outburst. Every night they climb up on the roof of his cell and
clomp around in heavy boots, the same ruse they had used during the
imprisonment of Mujib ur-Rahman during the civil war in Bangladesh. The hope
is that the prisoner will lose his temper and use strong language with the guards,
giving the army the excuse that some trigger-happy soldier had been provoked
into shooting him. But my father knows their tricks and instead includes the
harassment in his legal defense.
I returned to Flashman's followed by the now familiar convoy of two or
three military vehicles which in time would swell to seven, eight, sometimes ten
different military trucks. The people in the streets stared at the convoy as I
passed. Some looked on in sympathy. Others lowered their eyes as if they didn't
want to believe what was happening.
An eerie silence had fallen over the city, over the whole country. The
entire nation was in suspended animation. It was said over one hundred
thousand had been arrested. "Zia won't carry out the sentence against the prime
minister. It's not possible," people whispered among themselves. The only topic
of conversation was my father's trial, his death sentence, his Supreme Court
appeal.
In spite of my father's reluctance, we had entered an appeal before the
Supreme Court of Pakistan in Rawalpindi. "I am obliged to respect the views of
my wife and daughter, not only because of the relationship, but for a loftier
reason," my father had written to Mr. Yahya Bakhtiar, the former attorney general
of Pakistan and the leader of my father's legal team before the Supreme Court.
"Both have played a heroic and gallant part in these dangerous times. They have
a self-evident word and political claim on my decision."
The court had begun hearing the case in May. Though in other cases the
accused was given a month to enter an appeal before the Supreme Court, my
father had been given only a week. My father's lawyers were staying at
Flashman's, where we had set up an office to follow the appeal as closely as
possible. Yasmin Niazi, Dr. Niazi's teenage daughter, had joined in the work,
keeping my appointments straight, as had Amina Piracha, who was working as a
liaison to the foreign press for the team of lawyers. In addition, my old friend from
Oxford Victoria Schofield, who had succeeded me as president of the Oxford
Union, had come to Pakistan to help.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

121

The chief justice of the Supreme Court, Anwar ul-Haq, was as biased as
his counterpart on the Lahore High Court had been. Like the chief justice of the
High Court, with whom he was very friendly, Anwar ul-Haq was also from Zia's
home area of Jullandar in India. And again there was no pretense of separation
between executive and judicial. When Zia went to Mecca on pilgrimage in
September 1978, Anwar ul-Haq was sworn in as acting president. There was
even a hotline from the chief justice's chambers to the office of the chief Martial
Law administrator.
I learned just how prejudiced Anwar ul-Haq was years later in exile from
one of the other Supreme Court justices, Justice Safdar Shah. Anwar ul-Haq had
taken Justice Shah aside during the appeal. "We know Bhutto is innocent. But he
must be eliminated if Pakistan is to be saved," he had told him. Safdar Shah had
gone on to vote for my father's honorable acquittal, and was himself persecuted
by Anwar ul-Haq and the regime and forced into exile. Yet during the Supreme
Court hearing, both Zia and Anwar ul-Haq continued to claim my father's appeal
was being held in front of an independent judiciary. "We are going through the
evidence with an open mind," insisted Anwar ul-Haq.
On some days I had to force myself to get up in the morning. Quickly. Get
up. Get dressed. Face the day. More charges to refute. Meet with the few party
workers not in jail. Give interviews to the press gathering in Rawalpindi. The
regime-controlled press was reporting only the charges against my father.
Musawaat in Lahore, which remained open despite the closure of the Karachi
branch, and the world press were our only hope of getting the true story out.
Guardian correspondent Peter Niesewand and Bruce Loudon of the Daily
Telegraph became familiar faces.
The regime issued the first of a series of "White Papers" at the end of July,
this one criticizing the conduct of the March 1977 elections. At Flashman's we
worked constantly on my father's rejoinder to the false charges, which he wished
to file in the Supreme Court in his defense. Every day Victoria and I transcribed
the handwritten pages which the lawyers brought us from Rawalpindi Central
Jail. My father's handwriting on both sides of the paper was cramped and difficult
to read. It must have been far more difficult for him to write in the August heat of
Ramazan, during which he was keeping his fast in his death cell. The lawyers
took the typed pages back to my father, who edited them and sent them back to
us for retyping. We sent his finished rejoinder—our code name for it was
Reggie—to a secret press in Lahore.
But before the document was submitted in the Supreme Court the printed
copies were seized. In order to reproduce the document for the Supreme Court
and distribute it to the foreign press, PPP workers had to stay up all night making
photocopies of its three hundred pages. The location of the photocopier we used
and the identities of the people who helped had to be kept entirely secret.
The net was tightening around Flashman's. One night the police formed
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

122

an intimidating flank in front of the hotel, arrested one of our assistants, and
sentenced him quickly by military court. We worked under constant threat of not
knowing what would happen next.
When the rejoinder was finally submitted to the Supreme Court, the chief
justice banned its publication. By this time, however, several copies had already
found their way overseas. The rejoinder was later published in India as a book, If
I Am Assassinated, and became a bestseller.
Rumors were constantly being floated that the decision from the Supreme
Court was coming any minute. At the beginning of the hearing the chief justice
had announced that the appeal would be completed as soon as possible, and my
father's lawyers had been optimistic. Of the nine judges on the bench, five were
asking questions and reviewing the testimony in a way that seemed dismissive of
the Lahore judgment. But suddenly in June, Anwar ul-Haq had adjourned the
court and gone to Jakarta for a conference. We all felt the appeal was prolonged
and postponed until the judge most obviously in favor of acquittal, and the only
one on the bench with extensive murder trial experience, had been required to
retire at the end of July. Despite our request, Chief Justice Anwar ul-Haq refused
to allow him to complete the hearing. Another independent-minded judge was
forced to drop out in September when a hemorrhage behind his eye left him
temporarily dizzy and weak. His request that the court adjourn briefly until he
recovered was also denied. That left the balance against us, 4-3.
What could we do? The regime had control of the courts, the army, the
newspapers, the radio and television. Other conveniently timed White Papers
filled with false allegations designed to smear my father's reputation were being
released by the regime in four languages, and distributed among the foreign
embassies. At the same time, my father's accuser Ahmed Raza Kasuri launched
a tour of Europe and America, staying at expensive hotels and holding press
conferences about the "just trial" my father was receiving in Pakistan. Kasuri
claimed he was paying for everything himself, but the financial disclosure he and
every other member of the PPP had been required to file under Zia's Martial Law
regulations didn't support his claim. Where was the money coming from if not
from the regime?
"I want you to go on a tour of the Frontier," my father told me in
September. "We have to keep the people's morale up. Take my Mao cap with
you. It's in my dressing room at 70 Clifton. Wear it while you're speaking, then
take it off and put it on the ground. Tell them, 'My father said his cap should
always be placed before the feet of the people.'"
I listened to him carefully, but I was worried about his health. Every time I
saw my father in jail he looked thinner. His gums had turned deep red and at
places become infected. He often had a fever. My mother and I used to take
chicken sandwiches with us and try to tempt him into eating. We would wrap the
sandwiches in a moist cloth to keep them fresh and soft.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

123

But my father paid little attention to food during the September visit,
concentrating instead on coaching me on the themes for my upcoming
speeches. "The whole issue of autonomy will be reopened as a consequence of
Martial Law," he said. "Remind the people that I, through democracy, gave them
faith in a unified Pakistan. And only the return to democracy will hold the country
together."
His face seemed concerned as I left. "Pinkie, I hate to put you in any
danger. You may be arrested again. I've wrestled with this problem from the
beginning. But then I think of the thousands of others who are being whipped
and tortured for our cause. ..."
"Papa, please," I said quickly. "I know you are concerned as a father for a
daughter. But you are more than a father to me. You are also my political leader,
just as you are the political leader of the others who are suffering."
"Be careful, Pinkie," he called after me. "You are going into the tribal
areas. Don't forget how conservative they are. Sometimes your dupatta falls off
your head while you're speaking. Remember to put it back up."
"I'll be careful, Papa," I assured him.
"Good luck, Pinkie," I heard him call after me.
Victoria came with me to the Northwest Frontier Province and the tribal
areas, which are bordered by Afghanistan to the west and China to the north.
Yasmin accompanied me too, a brave act for a young girl who'd grown up in the
traditional protectiveness of a Pakistani family. She'd never spent a night away
from her home until I'd asked her late one night to stay with me at Flashman's.
Her grandmother had agreed reluctantly, not because of the danger from the
regime, but because tradition did not permit an unmarried girl to spend a night
away from home.
But the Niazis, like many families, were radicalized by the brutality of the
regime. At great cost to themselves, the Niazis insisted that I stay with them and
have some semblance of a family atmosphere rather than staying at the hotel. In
retaliation, the family was constantly harassed. Tax liens were filed against them.
The lane in front of their house was filled with intelligence trucks which followed
Mrs. Niazi to the market and her children to school. Intelligence agents trailed Dr.
Niazi's dental patients as well until his practice fell off to practically no one.
Together with local PPP leaders we traveled to Mardan, once a center of
the Gandharan Buddhist civilization; Abbotabad, a former British hill station;
Peshawar, the capital city of the Northwest Frontier whose walls of ocher brick
had guarded against invaders from Central Asia for centuries. The words poured
effortlessly from my heart at every stop in the Frontier and the autonomous tribal
areas ruled by the strict code of the Pathans: revenge for any insult, and
hospitality for any guest. "The Pathans are famous for their belief in honor. My
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

124

father is fighting not only for his honor, but for the honor of our country," I called
to the crowds whose features were as rugged as the nearby mountains of the
Khyber Pass. We went on to Swat, with its lush, terraced rice fields, and Kohat,
where salt blew in the air from the jagged salt range in the distance. I spoke in
Urdu, not knowing the regional language of Pashtu, but the Pathans listened all
the same. There was no resistance to me, either, as a woman, even in these
areas where the tribal women were fiercely guarded. The suffering in the
country, the suffering of my family, of all of us, had risen above the barrier of
gender. "Rasha, rasha, Benazir rasha!" the people yelled back in Pashtu.
"Welcome, welcome, Benazir, welcome!"
"Bravo," my father greeted me, standing in the door of his cell and
clapping his hands when I returned briefly to Rawalpindi before setting out to tour
the Punjab.
Hundreds of PPP activists gathered to hear me at the home of a party
official in Lahore. In spite of the regime's harsh punishments, the dedication of
the party workers was undiminished. "The trial is unfair. We'll protest by courting
arrest," the PPP loyalists told me. "Zia will have to arrest all of us before he can
go ahead with the death sentence." At Sargodha, where feudal landlords still held
sway, more crowds turned out. There was a tempo building, and the regime
quickly moved to crush it. Scores of PPP supporters were arrested shortly after
my departure from Sargodha, including my host, whose only crime was allowing
me to use his house. For this he was sentenced to a year's rigorous
imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 rupees, or $10,000.
"The regime is edgy. Let's not go on to Multan right away," some in the
party argued back in Lahore. "We have a momentum going," others countered.
"We might as well be arrested when sentiment is high." "If we back off a little
now, we'll be able to gain more time to visit more places and reach more people,"
the discussion continued. The second strategy won, and I returned briefly to
Karachi to answer another charge from the regime.
Meanwhile, the people's commitment to democracy was reaching new
heights. One after another men began to set themselves on fire in different cities,
immolating themselves in the ultimate protest against the perceived fate of their
leader. Looking at their photographs in Musawaat, I realized with a start that I
had met at least two of them. One, Aziz, had come to me at Flashman's with a
simple request a few months before: to pose for a photograph with him. Though I
was exhausted, I had agreed, a small effort on my part for which I was very
thankful when I read that he had burned himself alive.
Another, a Christian named Pervez Yaqub, who was the first to immolate
himself, had come to me with a desperate proposal shortly after my father's
arrest in September 1977. He was going to hijack an airliner and hold the
passengers hostage, he told me, until the regime was forced to release my
father. "You mustn’t," I told him. "Innocent people might die. And that would make
you no different from the lawless thugs in the regime. We must fight by our rules,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

125

and not descend to theirs." Now he had made the ultimate sacrifice, burning
himself to death in Lahore.
Pervez's life could have been saved by the crowd which had rushed to put
out the flames, but the Martial Law authorities prevented them from reaching him.
They wanted the people to watch his agony to scare any other Bhutto loyalists
who might want to do the same thing. But the depth of passion only intensified.
Over the next weeks, five more men would burn themselves to death to try to
save the life of their elected prime minister.
"The regime claims that those who burned themselves to death were paid
to do it by the party," I wrote in my notes for my upcoming speech at Multan.
"Can there be such a price on a human life? No. These brave men were idealists
whose dedication to democracy and decency transcended their own pain. We
salute them." I never got the chance to deliver the speech.
October 4, 1978, Multan Airport.
The flight from Karachi to Multan to continue our tour of the Punjab is
delayed and delayed. Yasmin and I arrive at the airport at 7 A.M. The flight
doesn't take off until noon. When we arrive at Multan, we understand why.
Instead of taxiing to the terminal, the plane is shunted off to the far end of the
tarmac and is immediately surrounded by army trucks and jeeps.
"Where is Miss Benazir Bhutto sitting?" say two men in plain-clothes,
boarding the plane.
The steward points to me.
"Come with us," they say.
"On what grounds?" I say.
"Don't ask questions," they say.
A small plane is standing nearby when Yasmin and I come down the
steps.
"You get in the Cessna," the officers say to me. "She stays here."
I look at Yasmin. Her eyes are huge in her face. Here she is, a young girl
in a strange city, alone. God knows what could happen to her. "Dogs!" the
fundamentalists and the Martial Law authorities have begun yelling at the women
all over Pakistan who have left the sanctuaries of their homes for the first time to
demonstrate against my father's arrest, my mother's arrest, the arrests of their
own husbands and sons and, increasingly, their daughters. Yasmin is also
concerned about what will happen to me. There is safety in numbers.
"I won't go without her," I say to the police.
"Get in the plane," they say, their eyes narrowing. "I
won't," I say, taking a firm grip on Yasmin's hand.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

126

Unbelievably, they move toward me, grab me, and start dragging me
across the tarmac. "Don't let go, Yasmin!" I yell to her, as she struggles to hang
on to me.
While the passengers in the plane we've just been taken from look on
horrified, Yasmin and I are pulled along the cement. My shalwar tears. The skin
on my legs scrapes and bleeds. Yasmin is screaming. But we don't let go of each
other.
The police's two-way radios crackle at the steps of the Cessna. As usual,
they aren't sure what to do and are requesting directions. While the policemen
are preoccupied, Yasmin and I dash up the steps into the little three-passenger
plane. The pilot informs the police that if he doesn't take off immediately, it will be
too dark for him to land. Land where? We don't know. The Corps Commander of
Multan is furious when the pilot's message is radioed to him. He instructs the
police to let us proceed. But the plane still sits on the runway.
"I haven't had food or water since seven o'clock this morning," the pilot
quietly says to the police. They quickly bring him a lunch box. When we are
airborne he turns and, having heard my request for water turned down by the
Corps Commander, hands it to us. "I've eaten. I got this for you," he says.
Five hours later, we land back in Rawalpindi. I know it is 'Pindi only
because I recognize one of the policemen who comes to take me from the plane.
At least Yasmin is home. As I struggle toward the door of the plane, the pilot
turns to me. I can still see the concern on his kind face, the tears that spilled out
of his eyes. "I'm a Sindhi," he said. That was all. That was enough.
My mother was delighted to see me when I arrived at the house, where
she was in her tenth month of detention. "What a pleasant surprise," she said,
thinking that I'd come for a visit. Her eyes widened when she saw my torn
clothes, my bloody legs. "Oh, I see," she said, her voice tapering off. Both of us
detained again.
I wrote a letter to Mir in America, where he had gone to appeal to the
United Nations to exert more pressure on the regime. "Papa has asked me to
give you some guidelines. He is advising, not criticizing. Hence, here we go:
"1. Caesar's wife must be above suspicion. The press here has said you
are living lavishly in London, which Papa knows you are not, but he wants me to
remind you that your personal life must be most circumspect. No movies, no
extravagance or people will say you are enjoying yourself while your father
languishes in a death cell.
"2. No interviews to, and keep completely away from, India and Israel.
Your interview with an Indian paper has been misconstrued here." And on and
on. I hated writing Mir such a seemingly bossy letter, knowing how hard he was
working. He had sold my little MGB and used the money to pay for the printing in
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

127

London of my father's rejoinder to the regime's charges against him. He was
meeting nonstop with every foreign member of government who would see him
and leading demonstrations of the Pakistani population in England to protest my
father's death sentence. I wished so much we could be fighting together, but
there was no way he or Shah, both of whom had left their studies to lead the fight
abroad, could return to Pakistan without being arrested. We all had to fight on,
alone.
December 18, 1978, Supreme Court, Rawalpindi.
The courtroom was swamped with people desperate to catch a glimpse of
their prime minister. After a lengthy court battle, my father's lawyers had won the
right for him to appear before the Supreme Court in his own defense. The
courtroom seated only a hundred. Three hundred to four hundred packed in for
the four days of his address, sitting on the radiators, squashed into the aisles,
perched on stacks of law books in the well in front of the bench. The thousands
who were turned away waited outside behind barricades to watch my father's
arrival in a police van at 9 A.M. and his return to prison at noon.
I wanted badly to be there, but I was in detention and my request for
permission was denied. My mother, however, had been released by the court in
November after almost a year of detention, and so was able to attend my father's
court appearance. My father's valet, Urs, managed to get a court pass. So did
Mrs. Niazi and Yasmin, as well as Victoria and Amina. Later, Victoria would write
a book about my father's ordeal entitled Bhutto: Trial and Execution. It should
have been called Judicial Murder.
My father's address, my mother told me, was brilliant. Over the four days
allowed him by the court, he refuted the charges against him of complicity in the
murder case, citing the irregularities and contradictions of the "witnesses" in the
Lahore trial; of the charges that he was a Muslim in name only; of the charges
that he personally rigged the elections. "I am not responsible for each and every
thought and idea born in the minds of officials or non-officials of our fertile Indus
Valley," he said. Speaking extemporaneously and without notes, my father once
more cast the spell of his intellect and oratory over the spellbound crowd.
"Everyone who is made of flesh has to leave this world one day. I do not
want life as life, but I want justice," he said. "The question is not that I have to
establish my innocence; the question is that the prosecution has to prove its case
beyond reasonable doubt. I want my innocence to be established not for the
person of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. I want it established for the higher consideration that
this has been a grotesque injustice. It puts the Dreyfus case in the shade."
My father's performance was even more remarkable considering the
conditions he'd been kept in. He had been kept awake by the army for nights on
end. He had not seen the sun for more than six months, and had been without
fresh water for twenty-five days in his death cell. He was pale and weak, my
mother told me, but he seemed to gain strength as his address went on. "I feel a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

128

little dizzy," he admitted in the courtroom. "I can't adjust myself to the momentum
and the people." He looked around the packed crowd. "Yes, it's nice to see
people," he said with a smile.
People in the courtroom rose in respect every time he entered or left. And
he insisted on appearing before the public as he always had, the impeccably
dressed and stylish prime minister of Pakistan. Urs had brought him the clothes
he requested from 70 Clifton and he appeared on the first day in court in a
tailored suit and a silk shirt and tie, with a colorful handkerchief in his pocket.
Only the loose fit of his trousers indicated the amount of weight he had lost.
At first the authorities allowed him to enter the courtroom freely down the
center isle. But when they saw how the people reached out to shake his hand,
and how he responded to the first affection he'd received in over a year by
smiling and touching them back, the security formed a human barrier around him.
For the last three days of his appearance, he was kept inside a tight circle of six
security men, their arms linked around him.
The appeal was completed on December 23rd. My mother and I applied
for permission to visit him on December 25th, the birthday of Pakistan's founder,
Mohammed Ali Jinnah. Our permission was denied. We were not permitted to
see him either on New Year's Day or five days later on his fifty-first birthday.
On February 6, 1979, the decision came down from the Supreme Court.
By a vote of 4 to 3, the death sentence was upheld.
My mother and I heard about the decision at 11 A.M., soon after it was
announced. We had hoped for a miracle from Zia's packed bench. But the four
Punjabi judges from the military heart of the country— two of them ad hoc judges
whose tenures would be confirmed by the military regime after the verdict—had
voted to uphold the lower court, while the three senior judges from the minority
provinces had voted to overrule. The reality of my father's death sentence made
me feel physically ill.
My mother was about to leave on her regular Tuesday visit with my father
when the Martial Law authorities arrived at our rented house with a detention
order for her. But she thwarted them. Before they realized what was going on, my
mother rushed out the door and got into her car, a fast-moving Jaguar. "Open the
gate," she commanded the police guards stationed around the house, where I
had been in detention since my arrest at Multan Airport. Not realizing that
detention orders had been issued for my mother as well, they obeyed. At high
speed she drove herself to Rawalpindi District Jail, outdistancing the pursuing
army jeeps. Because they were expecting her, the jail authorities let her in.
My mother got through one steel gate. Then another. She was just ahead
of her detention orders being relayed to the prison, thereby canceling her visiting
permission. She rushed on. The interior courtyard was right in front of her.
Steadily she moved through the army tents and the arsenal of weapons
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

129

surrounding my father's compound. The last gate finally opened.
My father was in his death cell. "The appeal has been rejected," she
managed to tell him before the jail authorities and police caught up with her. Her
face was remarkably serene when she was returned to the house. "I made it,"
she told me. "I was not going to give them the perverse satisfaction of telling your
father the decision." Once more we were both locked up. And there was only a
week to appeal my father's sentence.
At Flashman's, the lawyers worked nonstop on the review petition. They
had requested four copies of the Supreme Court's 1,500-page decision, over 800
of the pages written by Anwar ul-Haq. They received only one copy. A secretary
was dispatched to photocopy it. In the midst of the copying process he was
arrested, as was the owner of the photocopying machine.
Somehow the defense team managed to procure its own photocopying
machine and move it into Flashman's. This was very risky. As of the first of the
year, the regime had restricted the sale of typewriters and photocopying
machines to commercial businesses so that the equipment could not be used by
the PPP or any other political organization to produce underground literature.
Just using a typewriter or a photocopying machine was now deemed "anti-state"
while anyone selling us any new equipment risked arrest. The lawyers worked
on.
Locked up with my mother in Islamabad, I felt trapped in a never-ending
nightmare. Another sweep of arrests followed the Supreme Court decision.
Schools and universities were closed. Zia was bent on suppressing any
disturbance before it could occur. He quickly mopped up outbreaks of protest
before they could spread.
The repression unleashed by military regimes has a numbing effect on
people. When the danger or tension becomes too high, people turn to their own
survival psychology. They detach themselves. In silence lies safety. They seek
refuge in apathy. They don't want to reach out for fear that they, too, will
become victims.
But I was not so fortunate. I could not detach myself from the relentless
momentum toward my father's death. When I looked in the mirror, I didn't
recognize myself. My face was red and blotchy from acne caused by stress. I'd
lost so much weight that my chin, jaw, and eyebrows jutted out. My cheeks were
sunken, my skin tightly stretched.
I tried to keep up a regimen of exercise, jogging in place for fifteen
minutes every morning. But I kept losing my concentration and stopping. If only I
could sleep. But I couldn't. My mother gave me Valium. I took two milligrams, but
I kept waking up, my mind in a turmoil. "Try Ativan," my mother suggested. It
made me cry. I tried Mogodon instead. Nothing.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

130

February 12, 1979, Sihala Police Camp.
The authorities came in the morning to tell my mother and me that we
were being moved to a police training camp in Sihala a few miles from my
father's prison in Rawalpindi. We were taken to a remote building surrounded by
barbed wire on the top of a barren hill. Nothing was provided for us, no blankets,
no food. Nothing. Ibrahim and Basheer, two of our household staff from AlMurtaza, had to make the long trip back and forth every day with provisions.
February 13, 1979.
The lawyers finished writing their petition at 5 A.M., the morning it had to be
submitted. The court granted my father a stay of execution while the petition was
reviewed. On February 24th, the defense arguments began before the court.
Meanwhile appeals for clemency flooded into Pakistan again from heads of state
around the world. "All the politicians are asking to save a fellow politician but not
many non-politicans have asked me for clemency," Zia scoffed, describing the
pleas from the heads of state as nothing more than "trade union activity."
I visited my father from Sihala at the beginning of March. I don't know how
he kept going. He had refused all medical treatment since the death sentence
was upheld, and had stopped taking any medication. He had also stopped
eating, not only because of the pain in his gums and teeth, but as protest against
his treatment. He was being kept locked in his cell now, unable to use the
commode the prison officials had set up for him in another cell.
As usual, I was looking forward very much to seeing him, even more so
that day because I had a surprise for him. Before my mother's latest arrest, she
had gone to Karachi and brought back my father's dog, Happy, to keep me
company in detention. I loved Happy. We all loved Happy, a fluffy white mongrel
my sister had given my father. "Now you be quiet," I whispered to Happy when I
arrived at Rawalpindi District Jail with him under my coat.
At the search area at the first barrier, I found to my great luck that the jail
superintendent wasn't there. Nor was Colonel Rafi, the head of the army
contingent posted inside the jail who always stood around watching our every
move. Happy and I moved on to the second barrier. Luckily the policewomen
searcing me didn't object. "We don't have orders to search for a dog," one of
them said sympathetically. I stepped inside the final prison enclosure. "Go find
him," I said to Happy, letting him loose
Happy put his nose to the ground and dashed from cell to cell. I heard him
yapping with excitement when he found my very surprised father. "How much
more loyal dogs are than men," my father said when I caught up to the two of
them.
The authorities were furious when they found out about the dog. Happy
was never allowed to visit my father again. But at least I could give my father that
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

131

one moment, a reminder of life when we were a normal family, a mother, father,
and four children living under one roof, with dogs and cats in the garden. During
the first weeks of March, our lawyers flooded the court with more grounds for
review. They were exhausted by the enormity of their burden. When my mother
and I tuned in the BBC evening news at Sihala at the beginning of March, we
heard that Ghulam Ali Memon, a member of my father's defense team and one of
Pakistan's most highly respected lawyers, had died at his desk at Flashman's of
a heart attack. "Allah, ya Allah," he had reportedly said in the midst of dictating
what was to be his final legal attack against the majority decision of the Supreme
Court. Another victim of Martial Law was claimed. My mother and I turned off the
radio.
On March 23rd, the anniversary of the day Pakistan's founder,
Mohammed Ali Jinnah, called for the establishment of an independent Muslim
state, Zia announced that he would hold elections in the fall. The next day, the
Supreme Court announced its decision. Though my father's petition was
dismissed, the court unanimously recommended that the sentence be commuted
to life. Once again, hope surged. The decision now rested solely with Zia.
Seven days. There were seven days for somebody, anybody, to persuade
Zia not to send my father to his death. And Zia had every reason to spare him. A
split decision, especially a close one of 4-3 like my father's, had never resulted in
the death sentence in Pakistan. No executive government in judicial history had
refused to accept the unanimous recommendation of the highest court in the
country to commute the death sentence. And no one in the history of the
subcontinent had ever been put to death for conspiracy to murder.
There was pressure on Zia, too, from abroad. Messages were pouring in
again from foreign heads of state. Prime Minister Callaghan in Great Britain
appealed to Zia for mercy for the third time. Saudi Arabia, the seat of
fundamentalist Islam, appealed again. Even President Carter joined in and
appealed this time. But there was no reply from Zia. The minutes ticked by
toward my father's fate.
No date of execution was announced, giving the people false hope. No
one wanted to accept what my father had always known, preferring to cling to the
unanimous recommendation of the court and Zia's promises to Muslim
governments to commute the sentence to life. A plea from my father or his
immediate family, Zia had also let it be known, would give him a way to save face
and commute the sentence. But my father, who had accepted the inevitability of
his death long before, continued to refuse. "An innocent man does not appeal for
mercy for a crime he did not commit," my father insisted, forbidding us to appeal
as well. His oldest sister, one of my aunts in Hyderabad, went ahead and
appealed anyway, delivering her petition at the gate to Zia's house an hour
before the deadline was to expire. But there was still no reply from Zia.
The signs were increasingly ominous. In Rawalpindi District Jail, what
pitiful pieces of furniture there were in my father's cell were taken away, including
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

132

his cot. He was left to sleep on the floor on his roll of bedding. They even took
away his razor, leaving my cleanly shaven father with a stubble of gray beard on
his face. He was ill and very weak.
In Sihala, I was served with another detention order, restricting me for
another fifteen days on the grounds that I would "resort to further agitational
politics as a final bid to secure the release of [my] father, posing a serious threat
to peace and tranquility and to the efficient conduct of Martial Law."
Nobody knew what was going to happen. Would Zia actually go ahead
and hang my father in spite of world condemnation and the recommendation of
the court? If so, when? The answer seemed tragically clear on April 3rd, when
my mother and I were taken to our last meeting.
Yasmin! Yasmin! They are going to kill him tonight!
Amina! You here too. It's tonight! Tonight!
The lawyers drew up another review petition. Amina flew to Karachi,
where she and one of my father's lawyers, Mr. Hafiz Lakho, tried to file the lastminute petition. The registrar refused to accept it. Give the petition to the judges,
the registrar told them, but the judges wouldn't accept it either. One judge even
slipped out the back door of the courthouse to avoid them. Amina and Mr. Lakho
went to the house of the senior judge and pleaded at the gate. The judge refused
to see them. Brokenhearted, Amina flew back to Islamabad.
April 3, 1979.
Tick. Tick. The Martial Law forces are cordoning off our family graveyard,
cutting off all the roads to Garhi Khuda Bakhsh. Tick. Tick. Amina goes directly to
the Niazis' house from the airport, not wanting to be alone. Tick. Tick. "It's
tonight," Dr. Niazi is saying quietly over and over into the phone as Yasmin and
Amina lie silent and wide awake in the darkened house. Tick. Tick.
An army truck pulls away quickly from Rawalpindi District Jail in the early
morning. A short time later, Yasmin hears a small plane fly across Islamabad.
She convinces herself that it belongs to one of the Arab leaders who has gotten
into the prison and is spiriting my father away to safety. But the plane she hears
is taking my father's body home to Larkana.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

133

7
RELEASE FROM
AL-MURTAZA:

Democracy's Challenge
to Martial Law

As the first anniversary of my father's execution nears on April 4, 1980,
people are pressing past Al-Murtaza toward my father's grave in Garhi Khuda
Bakhsh. Now in our sixth month of detention, my mother and I apply to the
regime for permission to visit his grave but I know we won't receive it. The regime
is so apprehensive about any public demonstration of support for my father's
memory and the PPP that the roads leading to our ancestral village have been
blocked for a radius of a hundred miles.
No matter how many guns the regime levels at the people, Zia continues
to be haunted by my father's ghost. In his lifetime, my father was admired as a
statesman and social visionary. By his murder, he has been elevated in the
minds of his followers to the rank of martyr, and to some, a saint. No two forces
are more powerful in a Muslim country.
Miracles are being reported from my father's burial ground ten miles away
from Al-Murtaza. A crippled boy walks. A barren woman delivers a son. In the
year since my father's execution, thousands have made the pilgrimage to our
family graveyard to hold a rose petal or a piece of mud from my father's grave on
their tongues while they pray. The local administrators have torn down the sign
pointing to the graveyard isolated in the desert. But still the people come.
Police and army patrols harass them, demanding their names, writing
down their license plates if they've come by car or truck, their addresses if
they've made the journey by foot. Often their food is confiscated and the jugs of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

134

water put out for them by local villagers smashed. But still the people come,
heaping framed photos of my father and strings of roses and marigolds on his
grave in the desert.
Eight days after the anniversary of my father's death, our court hearing
challenging our detention finally comes up in Karachi. When our lawyer mentions
the letter I'd written protesting the disrespect of Captain Iftikhar during Sanam's
attempted visit the month before, the advocate general claims to have no
knowledge of any such letter. But I have the signed receipt from the jailer, and
our lawyer asks for a day's adjournment so we can produce it. To prevent a letter
from reaching the court is contempt, punishable by six months' imprisonment.
They know I have the proof. The authorities have to do something to preempt the
contempt charge.
That night my mother and I are abruptly freed. I never see the jailer again.
Later I hear he was denied promotion and reassigned to a "punishment post."
Freedom. But who knew for how long. My mother stayed in Karachi after
our release from Al-Murtaza while I flew to Rawalpindi to catch up on the
developments during our six months of detention. The pressure in my ear was
almost unbearable during the flight, especially during the descent into 'Pindi.
When I woke up the next morning at Yasmin's house, the pillowcase was
splattered with stinking pus and blood. My friends rushed me to the hospital.
"You're very lucky," the doctor told me at the emergency room after surgically
cleaning my ear. "The air pressure in the plane forced the infection to burst
outward. It could have burst inward and caused serious damage."
I didn't know what to think. First the regime's doctor at Al-Murtaza had
insinuated that I was imagining the discomfort in my ear, then had accused me of
perforating my eardrum. Now this doctor, after telling me how lucky I'd been,
simply gave me a note advising me to have my ear checked every two weeks by
my doctor in Karachi. Were the doctors inept or were they deliberately ignoring
my condition? No one told me that I had a serious mastoid infection which was
slowly melting the delicate bones of the middle ear. That's what was causing my
partial deafness. Without surgery, I learned later, the chronic inflammation could
lead to permanent deafness and facial paralysis. But I was told nothing.
My mother was very concerned when I returned to Karachi. "Write to the
regime and request permission to travel abroad for a checkup," she urged me.
"Your health has nothing to do with politics." I wrote to the regime. We received
no reply. The regime wanted to keep us where they could see us.
Military intelligence vans were parked twenty-four hours a day outside of
70 Clifton. Whenever my mother or I left the house, they followed us. Whoever
came to the house was photographed and their license plates noted. Our phone
lines were tapped. Sometimes there was a clicking noise. Other times the line
just went dead.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

135

"Why don't you go back to Larkana and try to straighten out the farm
finances?" My mother suggested when I felt stronger. "No one in the family has
been able to review our accounts for two years."
Intelligence agents never left my trail as I headed back to Al-Murtaza to
meet with our farm managers and go over the planting and harvest reports. I had
no idea what to expect or even to look for. My father or brothers had always
tended the lands.
While I went over the books, I often felt like I was back in the kitchen as an
eight-year-old struggling with the household accounts with Babu. But it was a
relief to have something concrete to deal with and to stop even momentarily the
endless whirling in my mind. Every morning before the summer heat became
unbearable I drove across the guava orchards and the fields of rice and
sugarcane in a jeep to familiarize myself with my new responsibilities. I roamed
the fields in sneakers with a scarf or straw hat on my head as protection from the
scorching sun, learning about our system of irrigation canals bolstered with tube
wells, helping with the summer planting of rice and cotton, and reading up on
sugarcane cultivation and the problems of waterlogging and salinization. The
physical exertion became a balm.
The tenant farmers, the kamdars or managers, and the munshis or
accountants were greatly relieved to have a member of the Bhutto family back
among them. "There is gold in the step of the owner. Now that you are here we
will prosper," one said to me. "We are no longer orphans."
I loved being on the lands. Still, it felt odd to be working side by side with
men in Larkana. Women in the rural areas were very conservative, rarely leaving
their homes without wearing burqas and certainly not driving cars. But I had no
choice. There were no male members of my family left in Pakistan. My father
was dead and my brothers, who would have been arrested immediately if they
returned to Pakistan, were living in Afghanistan. So back and forth I went to the
fields every morning. There was little room left in my life, in any of our lives, for
tradition.
In a way I had transcended gender. There was not a person who did not
know the circumstances that had forced me out of the pattern of landowning
families, where young women were guarded zealously and rarely, if ever, allowed
to leave their homes without a male relative. Our tradition holds that women are
the honor of families. To safeguard their honor, and themselves, a family keeps
their women in purdah, behind the four walls and under the veil.
My four aunts, my grandfather's daughters from his first marriage, formed
part of this tradition. With no suitable first or second Bhutto cousins available for
marriage, they had been consigned to a life of purdah behind their compound
walls in Hyderabad. They had great status within the family because everyone
understood why they had never married. And they always seemed very cheerful,
having never known any other sort of life. "They have no worry lines in their
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

136

faces," my mother would often say in wonderment when she came back from
visiting them.
To me it seemed a life of boredom, but my aunts seemed happy enough.
They learned enough Arabic to read the Holy Quran, supervised the cooking,
made delicious carrot pickle and sweetmeats, sewed and knitted. For exercise
they took walks around the courtyard. Occasionally the cloth man would
discreetly leave bolts of new fabric outside the walls for them to pick and choose
from. They were the old generation. I was the new.
In the evenings at Al-Murtaza, I met with student delegations and other
visitors who brought news of those still in jail and reports about resistance to
military rule. We drew up lists of people to visit in prison and of families to
console. In the afternoons I finally had the time and freedom to arrange for a
shamiana to be built to shade my father's grave and to fulfill a request from my
mother to replace the old wooden windows at Al-Murtaza with glass. "I'd rather
see than be cool," my mother had said during the almost daily power failures
we'd experienced in our long months of detention at Al-Murtaza. "Who knows
when we'll be detained here again? We might as well be ready."
I also found myself thrust into an unfamiliar Eastern tradition. As the only
Bhutto around, I was suddenly considered the "elder" by the local villagers, who
began to come to the courtyard of a mud hut on the lands to have me settle their
feuds and problems. A hangover from feudal times when the heads of clans held
sway over every decision affecting their people, an abbreviated system of tribal
justice still remained in the rural areas, as did the tribes themselves. Though I
was certainly not the head of the Bhutto tribe, the people insisted on coming to
me anyway. Justice in Pakistan was too slow, too far away, too expensive, and
considered too corrupt to bother with. The police had the reputation of arresting
people for "pocket money," releasing them only upon payment of a bribe. The
people felt better served by the faislas, or judgments, from a family they knew.
But after eight years in the West, I was discovering, I was not well versed in
dealing with the intricacies of rural life.
"His cousin murdered my son forty years ago," a toothless old man argued
in front of me one morning while I sat on a rope bed holding court. "The faisla
from your great-uncle then was my marriage to the first daughter born to his
family. And there is. Look at her! But he won't give her to me."
I looked at the eight-year-old girl cowering behind her father. "He never
said a word when my daughter was born," the father retorted. "I thought he had
forgiven us for the crime committed so many years before. If I'd known he was
going to claim her, I would have raised my daughter knowing that she was not
ours and that one day I would have to give her up. Now we are thinking of
arranging a marriage for her with another family and they want her. We have
given our word to the others. How can we break it?"
I shuddered at the thought of this poor little girl being haggled over. The
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

137

fate of women in the rural areas was not always a happy one. Few of them had
any choice in their lives, or were ever asked what they wanted. "You will not get
the girl, but a cow and 20,000 rupees in compensation," I said to the old man.
"That is my judgment. You should have made your claim before she was
betrothed to another." A cow for a girl, not an equation that had ever come up in
discussions about the women's movement at Radcliffe. But this was Pakistan.
And the old man was furious, grumbling loudly when he left.
My faisla the next day turned out to be a disaster. "My wife has been
kidnapped," a man cried in front of me. His father-in-law added to the din. "The
sky has fallen on our heads. Our lives are finished. All day my daughter's children
are crying for their mother. You must help us get her back."
"Whom do you suspect?" I asked, alarmed for the woman. When they told
me I sent someone to the village to negotiate with the village elders. The young
woman was successfully returned. And she was furious.
"I don't want to live with my husband. I am in love with someone else" was
the message she sent me. "This is the third time I've run away and been
returned. I thought you as a woman would understand and sympathize with me."
I was flabbergasted. Did everyone know but me that the only way a
woman could leave her husband in the harsh codes of tribal traditions was by
being "kidnapped"? An unhappy wife cannot go voluntarily. The poor young
woman, I discovered later, never managed to escape again. Not for the first time
I realized the conflict between tribal traditions and the human values of equality
and free choice.
The gap between a democratic Pakistan and Pakistan under military
dictatorship was also widening. When I was passing faislas in the fields of
Larkana, the special military courts Zia had set up in every province, presided
over by one magistrate and two officers with no legal training, were dispensing
more and more death sentences and life imprisonments. Injustice was also being
speeded up in the hundreds of summary military courts where a single untrained
officer heard testimony and awarded up to a year's rigorous imprisonment and
fifteen lashes on the spot. While the faislas I issued were not binding and the
disputes could be taken to court, the accused in the military courts were allowed
no lawyers and no right of appeal. Only by bribing the presiding officer at the rate
of 10,000 rupees per lash, then about $100, could the victims escape on-the-spot
punishment. The noose of Martial Law was tightening.
Martial Law Order No. 77, May 1980: The jurisdiction of the civil courts is
replaced with the military courts in such crimes as treason and subversion of
members of the armed forces. The punishments run from death by hanging to
whipping and imprisonment for life.
Martial Law Order No. 78: The twelve-month period of detention without
trial for political prisoners is reiterated, but with a new twist. There no longer
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

138

needs to be any explanation at all to the people arrested in their homes or on the
streets. "Reasons or grounds for detention . . . shall not be communicated to any
person," the order states. The detention order can now be extended for as long
as the Martial Law authorities feel "the circumstances so warrant."
Now anyone, anywhere, can be arrested without any right of appeal, on a
charge he or she is unaware of, and be held indefinitely. On June 19th, a
procession of lawyers calling for the withdrawl of these new orders and for
elections to return the government to civilian rule set out in Lahore. Eighty-six
lawyers were beaten up and arrested. So were twelve others in a group arrested
in Karachi in August for calling for the restoration of the Constitution of 1973.
Students and trade union leaders were also being swept up by the regime in a
reign of terror seemingly without end.
When I returned to Karachi during the summer, my mother cautioned me
to be very careful. But the regime was not taking any risks. When we went to
Lahore for the wedding of a family friend in August, our hotel was surrounded by
the police and we were externed from the province of Punjab. The police drove
us under armed escort to the airport and put us on a plane bound for Karachi.
It was clear that three years after the coup and the imposition of Martial
Law, Zia had still not been able to bludgeon the people into acquiescence or win
their support. Instead he was losing ground. Zia had almost no political support,
just the control of the military. Even the members of the PNA, the coalition of
politicians who had opposed my father and the PPP in the 1977 elections, some
of whom had subsquently become Zia's ministers, were defecting. When six
months after my father's death Zia had dispensed with their ministries and
banned all political parties, the PNA found themselves in the political wilderness.
As a result, some components of the PNA had started offering to
cooperate with the PPP against Zia soon after my mother and I were detained at
Al-Murtaza in October 1979. We had taken their advances then as a political
maneuver to gain leverage with the military regime. "If you don't want us as
ministers," they were effectively telling Zia, "we'll go the PPP." Now, in the fall of
1980, the overtures from our old adversary, the PNA, began again. This time we
had to take them seriously.
Desperate to create a political base, Zia and his few remaining supporters
were resorting to bribes. Every day brought new reports of Zia's seduction
campaign. Dhoki, the son of a poor PPP leader, who worked in a bicycle shop
and earned two rupees a day, was offered 1,000 rupees to forsake the party for
the Muslim League, a PNA faction still supporting Zia. A PPP member as
powerful as Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi, the president of Sindh and a former chief
minister, was offered—and considered accepting—the prime ministership of the
regime by Zia himself. The danger of a political realignment orchestrated by Zia
was great, fooling the people into thinking a civilian solution to Zia's hated military
regime had been reached.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

139

"We have to outmaneuver Zia before he outmaneuvers us," my mother
said to me in September after Jatoi was offered the prime ministership. "Much as
I hate the idea, perhaps we should take up the feelers put out by the PNA. There
is no point splintering the opposition to Zia."
At first I was appalled. "It will cause a storm among the party leaders," I
protested. "How can we forget that it was the PNA who brought the charges of
election rigging against the PPP in the first place, the PNA who paved the way
for the army takeover? They were Zia's ministers when he sent Papa to his
death."
"But what other choice do we have?" my mother said. "Now it is Jatoi.
Tomorrow it will be others. When ideal conditions do not present themselves, you
have to deal with ugly realities."
My mother called for a secret meeting of the thirty-odd members of the
PPP Central Executive Committee. We knew we were taking a great risk, political
gatherings having been banned, but if we just sat silently by we were in fact
acquiescing to the regime. This meeting, like all others, was called at 70 Clifton.
The leaders slipped in from as far away as the Northwest Frontier Province and
Baluchistan. And predictably, the debate was bitter.
"The PNA are murderers, murderers," said one member from Sindh. "If we
deal with them today, then what is there to stop us from dealing directly with
General Zia tomorrow?"
"But Mao Tse-tung cooperated with Chiang Kai-shek when the Japanese
invaded China," countered the aged Sheik Rashid, the Marxist in the party. "If
they could cooperate in the national interest, I say we should cooperate with the
PNA."
Back and forth the argument raged. "We agree that they are opportunists
and self-seekers," I offered. "But what can we do? We can either wait for the
initiative to slip out of our hands or swallow the bitter pill of the PNA and seize the
initiative ourselves. I suggest we compromise and form an alliance without giving
up our separate Party identities."
After seven hours pragmatism finally prevailed and each one of us
reluctantly agreed to respond to the PNA overture. The framework for the MRD,
the Movement to Restore Democracy, was formed.
"There is no use in both of us landing in jail again at the same time so you
keep a low political profile," my mother told me. "That way one of us, anyway,
can stay on the outside to lead the party."
Reluctantly, I agreed. But at the same time, I was somewhat relieved.
Though the concept of the MRD was politically expedient, I still found it difficult
to accept an alliance with my father's former enemies. The leaders of the former
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

140

opposition parties evidently found it just as difficult to negotiate with the PPP—
and with each other. Deeply suspicious, the leaders of the fiercely opposed
parties wouldn't talk to each other directly throughout the preliminary meetings,
but only through emissaries.
The process was further complicated by the bitterness of many of the
exchanges leading to the shaky new coalition, especially over the wording of the
potential MRD charter: whether the elections of 1977 were or were not rigged,
whether "execution" or "assassination" should be used in describing my father's
death. It took four months, from October 1980 to February 1981, to break the
deadlock and work out a draft agreement among all ten parties, and an uneasy
one at that.
The Muslim League party of Mohammed Khan Junejo, who went on to
become Zia's handpicked prime minister, backed out at the eleventh hour. The
other leaders and party deputies finally met together face-to-face for the first time
on the night of February 5, 1981, at 70 Clifton.
I looked at my father's former opponents now sitting in his house to strike
a political deal with his widow, the chairperson of the PPP, and his daughter.
What a strange business, politics. Nasrullah Khan, the fez-wearing leader of the
Pakistan Democratic Party, sat on my mother's right. Opposite me sat Kasuri, the
fleshy-faced representative of Asghar Khan's more moderate Tehrik-e-Istiqlal.
Bearded leaders from the religious party Jamaat-ul-Ulema-e-Islam were on one
side of the room; on the other, Fatehyab, head of the small leftist Mazdoor Party,
wearing starched white churidaar-kurta, loose shirt with tight pajamas. There
were around twenty people in all, most from the former PNA coalition. I had to
keep reminding myself that the point was to unseat Zia, that the point, despite
our divergent views, was to cement a political coalition to force Zia to hold
elections. But it was hard.
Cigarette smoke and tempers rose among the velvet-paneled walls and
chandeliers in the drawing room as the meeting wore on so long it had to be
reconvened in the morning. At one point a former PNA leader tried to justify his
party's role in the 1977 agitation. I was surprised by the implied criticism of the
PPP here in our own house.
"We are here to discuss a coalition for democracy, not to discuss what you
think of us or we of you," I said in an icy tone.
"Yes, we must look to the future, not to the past," Nasrullah Kahn calmed
us both.
Still, I found it difficult to watch the politicians drinking coffee out of my
father's china, sitting on his sofa, using his telephone to excitedly call friends
around the country to exclaim: "I'm at 70 Clifton! Yes, really. Mr. Bhutto's house!"
Yasmin, Amina, and Samiya prevailed upon me to calm down. "They have
come to you. It's a vindication of the strength of the PPP," Samiya said.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

141

"You wanted to form this coalition," Amina added. "It is politically good, so
take the difficulties in stride."
I swallowed my objections, as did the other leaders who finally, one by
one, signed the charter uniting all parties. And on February 6, 1981, the
Movement to Restore Democracy was born.
The news of the signing of the MRD charter, which many heard on the
BBC, electrified the length and breadth of Pakistan. The psychological boost it
gave to the people led many to interpret it as a signal to launch a protest against
the injustices of the Martial Law regime. The students in the Frontier Province
were the first to take to the streets. Immediately Zia served my mother and me
with externment orders to keep us from visiting the wounded.
The discontent soon spilled over into Sindh and Punjab, where university
professors, lawyers, and doctors joined the swelling protest movement. More
student protests broke out in Multan, Bahawalpur, Sheikupura, Quetta. "Thank
God for the MRD," taxi drivers, shopkeepers, and small traders began to
whisper. "Zia's time is finally over." Our cook came back from Karachi's Empress
Market to report that "even the butchers are ready to strike at the call of the
MRD."
Zia knew he was in a corner. He closed down universities all over
Pakistan and banned meetings of any more than five people. But the
demonstrations continued, described by Time magazine as "the most serious
wave of opposition that has faced General Zia."
A secret meeting of the MRD was called for February 27th in Lahore. Zia
reacted quickly, arresting many of the MRD leaders on February 21st. Other
members of the MRD were issued restriction orders externing them from
Punjab. "Your entry in the Punjab is deemed as prejudicial to public safety and
maintenance of public order as well as public interest," my own order read from
the governor of the Punjab.
My mother tightened the agreement we had made about limiting my
political activity. "Do nothing political for the time being. If I am arrested you must
be there to provide leadership," she told me firmly. The situation was becoming
explosive, close to toppling Zia, and I chafed under the restrictions. It fell to my
mother to try to attend the secret meeting of the MRD in Lahore. All the roads to
the city were sealed off by the police and every car was being searched. The
members of the MRD still at large had to travel to the meeting by circuitous
routes, including my mother, who went by train disguised as a grandmother in a
burqa and accompanied by her "grandson," the thirteen-year-old son of one of
our staff.
The police raided the meeting and arrested the members, including my
mother, who was externed back to Karachi. But not before the MDR delivered its
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

142

ultimatum, a call for the end of Martial Law and for elections within three months.
"We demand that Zia quit immediately, failing which the Martial Law regime will
be removed by the irresistible will of the people," the MRD announced in Lahore.
The MRD set March 23rd as the target date for massive strikes and
demonstrations across Pakistan. Some of the PPP councillors elected in the
1979 elections agreed to resign and call for Zia's resignation at the time of the
strike. The countdown had begun for Zia's downfall and the return of civilian
government to Pakistan. The clock was finally ticking for Zia.
March 2, 1981.
I am sitting in the living room of 70 Clifton with a group of party workers
when the phone rings. It is Ibrahim Khan, the Reuters representative in Karachi.
"What is your reaction to the news?" he asks me.
"What news?"
"A Pakistan International Airlines plane has been hijacked."
"By whom?" I ask, startled. A PIA plane had never been hijacked before.
"Nobody knows yet," he says. "Nobody knows anything, who the hijackers are,
where they're taking the plane, or what they want I'll try and keep you posted. But
may I have a reaction?"
"All hijacking is bad, whether it is a plane or a nation" I respond
automatically. When I hang up the phone, the PPP members are looking at me
expectantly.
"One of our planes has been hijacked," I say. "That's all I know."

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

143

8
SOLITARY CO FI EME T
I SUKKUR JAIL

March 13, 1981.
Why am I here? I don't understand. Jail, now. A remote jail in the desert of
Sindh. It is cold. I hear the prison clock strike one o'clock, then two o'clock. I can't
sleep. The chill desert wind sweeps through the open bars of my cell, four walls
of open bars. The cell is more like a huge cage, an enormous space with only a
rope cot in it.
I twist and turn on the cot, my teeth chattering. I have no sweater, no
blanket, nothing. Only the shalwar khameez I had been wearing when I was
arrested in Karachi five days ago. One of the jailers had felt sorry for me and
quietly passed me a pair of socks. But she was so frightened of being caught for
her charity that this morning she had asked for them back. My bones ache. If
only I could see, I could at least walk around. But the electricity is turned off in my
cell at night. From seven o'clock on, there is nothing but the cold darkness.
The police had come for me on March 7th at 70 Clifton. But I wasn't there.
I had spent the night with Samiya, avoiding the policy meeting my mother was
holding at 70 Clifton with the leaders of the MRD. The police had evidently gone
quite berserk in their efforts to locate me, raiding my cousin Fakhri's house and
70 Clifton, where they first arrested my mother, then tore the place apart
searching for me. "What do you think she is, a beetle?" my sister, Sunny, had
asked the police when they emptied matchboxes searching for me.
Fanning out across Karachi, the police had gone on to raid the houses of
my old school friends, including that of the Punthakeys, a Zoroastrian family.
Their twenty-five-year-old daughter Paree was taken to the police station, where
the police interrogated her for seven hours. Paree and her family were members
of a religious minority, and under Zia's policy of Islamization, anyone who was
not a Muslim was now particularly prone to punishment. "We know how to deal
with religious minorities in this country," the police had warned Paree's relatives
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

144

when they contacted the authorities to protest Paree's detention. "You have no
place in politics in this country. You shouldn't get involved."
After searching the houses of two other friends, Putchie and Humo, the
police finally caught up with me the next day at the home of Dr. Ashraf Abbasi,
the former Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly and one of my mother's
doctors in Karachi. "The police are here and want to search the house," Dr.
Abbasi's son Safdar told us as I was preparing to take advantage of her directdial phone to ring up some friends in Islamabad. We looked at him in
amazement. Knowing nothing about the raids, and having steadfastly avoided
any MRD political activity, I thought the police had come for Dr. Abbasi, or
possibly her son Munawwar. "Tell them there's no need to raid the house," I told
Safdar. "Ask them who they want." He came back a moment later. "They have
come for you," he said.
There was something new and terrible about this arrest. I sensed it when I
was told to get into the back of an open jeep crammed with constables rather
than one of the cars they had used to take me into detention before. I refused,
and finally they let me get in front. The size of the military convoy following me
though the empty streets was also bigger, and the destination ominous: a police
station. I had never been taken to a police station before. What was going on?
No one would tell me as I sat for five hours in the bare room, watching the
policemen smoke cigarette after cigarette and spit betel-nut juice at the already
stained walls. A look of fear was frozen on all their faces. This time, I was to find
out shortly, Zia had gone across the boundaries of his past repression and
brutality.
What the authorities knew, but I didn't, was that thousands of people were
being rounded up all over Pakistan in the biggest sweep ever. Amnesty
International, whose figures were always conservative estimated that over six
thousand people were arrested in March 1981 alone. In the five days since the
hijacking of the PIA airliner on March 2nd, Zia had decided to use the hijacking
as a pretext to stop the ground swell of support for the MRD movement.
Everybody with the slightest connection with the MRD or the PPP was being
taken to prison.
The Niazis were arrested in Islamabad. The police came for Amina too,
though when they saw she was nine months pregnant they took her husband,
Salim, instead. She went into labor out of shock. Yahya Bakhtiar, the head of my
father's legal defense team and former attorney general of Pakistan, was
arrested in Baluchistan. Faisal Hayat, a former member of the National Assembly
and the nephew of Khalid Ahmed, the deputy commissioner of Larkana, who had
been forced into exile, was arrested in Lahore, as again, were many of the
women members of the PPP. Qazi Sultan Mahmood, the assistant manager of
Flashman's Hotel, was arrested for the third time in Rawalpindi, as were Irshid
Rao, the editor of Musawaat in Karachi, and Pervez Ali Shah, a leading member
of the Sindh PPP. The list went on and on. And our treatment was reaching a
new level of barbarity.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

145

"Where is my mother?" I asked a group of policemen in the station house.
"In Karachi Central Jail," they said.
"In the rest house?" I asked, the rest house being a relatively comfortable
accommodation for visiting jail officials, where my father had been held at the
beginning.
"In a cell," they told me.
I gasped. My mother, the widow of the former prime minister, in a Class C
cell with no running water, no bedding, no air?
"Where are you taking me?" I asked the police.
"To join your mother," they said.
They were lying.
I was held incommunicado for five days in the Karachi Central Jail rest house,
now stripped of its furniture to the barest minimum. The officials there claimed
they didn't know my mother's whereabouts, and denied that she was even being
held in Karachi. I was also denied permission to see my lawyer. I had no clothes
with me, only what I had on when I was arrested. I had no hairbrush or comb, no
tooth-brush or toothpaste, no supplies at all. I was also under medication for
gynecological problems, brought on by the cumulative stress. I needed more
medicine, but there was no doctor or no woman I could talk to about what I
needed.
"You will be leaving here at two-thirty A.M.," the jail superintendent said,
coming to my cell on the night of the 12th. He looked frightened. "Be ready."
"Where are you taking me?" I asked. There was no reply.
"Where is my mother?" I asked. Again, there was no reply.
For the first time, I felt afraid. I had heard rumors that the jail authorities
sometimes took controversial prisoners into the desert at night and simply killed
them. Their bodies were buried before their families were notified that their
relatives either had been killed while trying to escape or had suffered mysterious
and sudden heart attacks. When I first arrived at the rest house I'd written a letter
to the Sindh High Court challenging my arrest and asking either that I be
produced in court in my own defense or that a lawyer be sent to me. Now I was
desperate to have the letter reach its destination.
"You must send this letter to the court," I urged one of the jailers while I
waited for the regime's officers to arrive in the early hours of the morning. He
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

146

quietly took my letter and stuffed it into his pocket. Thank God for that. If he
delivered it, at least there would be some record of where I was and where I had
been taken from.
A vanload of policewomen came for me at 2:30. So did trucks full of police
and army men. We raced through the empty streets at breakneck speed in a car
with darkened windows, as if we were expecting an ambush. Suddenly the car
lurched to a stop and there was much whispering and talking back and forth on
two-way radios.
"Isolate her on the tarmac," I heard the instructions come through. I was
relieved. At least I was at the airport. But where were they taking me? I knew the
plane schedule by heart now, and there were no flights to anywhere in Pakistan
at this hour. Perhaps to Larkana, I consoled myself. Perhaps in their concern for
secrecy they had arranged for a special plane. I kept waiting for one to land, but
none came. Instead I sat and I sat and I sat for four hours until I saw the dawn
break.
At 6:30, a regular passenger plane appeared on the tarmac. I was loaded
onto the flight, a policeman in the seat beside me, two in back of me, two across
the aisle. "Where are we going?" I asked the air hostess. The police cut off her
answer. "You are under arrest and can speak to no one," they said.
What was going on? I hadn't seen a paper during my five days in Karachi
Jail and had no idea why my mother and I were being treated so harshly. The
formation of the MRD and our challenge to Zia, I was sure, had brought on these
last waves of arrest. The newspapers had been filled with little else for the week
before I was arrested. But what was allowing the regime to treat us so severely?
And why was there such fear on the faces of the other passengers, even on the
faces of the policemen?
The air hostess passed me a newspaper. It was dominated not by news of
the MRD, but by news of the hijacking. Calling for the release of fifty-five
Pakistani political prisoners, the hijackers had ordered the plane to Kabul,
Afghanistan, where they had shot one of the passengers, an army officer named
Major Tariq Rahim, who had once been an aide-de-camp of my father. The pilot
had then been forced to fly to Damascus, Syria.
I caught my breath as I read on, half of me refusing to believe the
newspaper report, half of me dreading it was true. The hijackers were claiming to
be members of a resistance group called Al-Zulfikar. Al-Zulfikar was said to be
based in Kabul, where my brothers were living. The group's leader, the article
claimed, was my brother Mir.
Thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three. Seven strokes to go with the hairbrush.
Ninety-seven, ninety-eight. Count to one hundred while brushing the teeth. Walk
now for fifteen minutes in the open courtyard. Discipline. Routine. I must not
deviate. Up and down the open sewer running through the dusty prison yard,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

147

along the empty, barred cells facing my own cell in the locked enclosure. The
prison compound, the jailers tell me, had all been emptied because of me. The
regime has placed me in utter isolation.
Besides the jailers who unlock my cavernous open cage in the morning to
bring me a cup of weak tea and bread for breakfast, weak lentil soup, boiled
pumpkin, and a twice-weekly serving of fish for lunch or supper before locking
me in again, I see no one. On the rare occasions I hear a human voice in the five
months I am in solitary confinement in Sukkur, it is to give me depressing news.
"Today fifty more were arrested," the jailers would say on their rounds. "Today a
political prisoner is to be whipped."
Like the Soviet move into Afghanistan, the hijacking had come at a critical
time for Zia. On the threshold of being forced out of office by popular uprising, Zia
was using the event to falsely link the PPP with terrorism. The timing was so
incredible that it led many to conjecture that Zia had orchestrated the hijacking
himself. If so, it was very effective. Thirteen days after the hijacking began and
only minutes before the hijackers' deadline to blow up the plane, the regime
agreed to meet their demands to release fifty-five political prisoners. What did
fifty-five prisoners matter now that the regime had imprisoned thousands of its
political opposition, and charged many of them with terrorism? The MRD
challenge was no longer even mentioned in the papers. Only the hijacking and
Al-Zulfikar were.
Locked up in my cell in Sukkur, I didn't even know yet about Zia's efforts to
directly link the PPP, and particularly my mother and me, to Al-Zulfikar. Instead, I
concentrated on getting released. I felt relieved when my lawyer, Mr. Lakho,
visited me at Sukkur to draw up an appeal against my detention. Once again I'd
been helped by an honest jailer. The letter I'd written to the Sindh High Court had
been delivered after all. But both the jailer's efforts and those of Mr. Lakho would
prove to be fruitless.
On March 23rd, three or four days after Mr. Lakho's visit, the military
regime issued a "Provisional Constitutional Order." "General Zia shall have, and
shall be deemed to always have had, powers to amend the Constitution," it read.
Using the new PCO, Zia immediately struck down the authority of the civil courts
to hear challenges to Martial Law sentences. The appeal I'd filed through Mr.
Lakho, and that of every other political prisoner, was now moot. We could be
arrested, tried, sentenced, and executed under a military court without any legal
recourse at all.
Zia also used the new PCO to purge the courts of any judicial opposition.
All judges were now required to swear an oath upholding the supremacy of
Martial Law and Zia as chief Martial Law administrator. The judges who refused
to take the oath were dismissed. Others were dismissed before they had the
chance to take the oath. One-quarter of Pakistan's judiciary was eliminated by
the regime's new order, including all the judges who had been overruling the
verdicts of death and rigorous imprisonment for political prisoners. If it is a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

148

question of sharing power with the judiciary, I will not have it, Zia was quoted as
saying in the Guardian. "They are there to interpret the law." International law
associations and again Amnesty International lodged strong protests with the
regime, but they did no good. Civil law in Pakistan had effectively ceased to exist.
And Mr. Lakho was not allowed to contact me again.
Time, relentless, monotonous. To keep my brain stimulated, I recorded
everything that was happening to me in a thin little note-book a sympathetic jailer
smuggled into my cell. That passed some of the time. I was allowed one
newspaper a day, a new edition of Dawn for interior Sindh. Read it slowly, I kept
reminding myself, word for word. Fishing stories. Puzzles for children on Friday,
the Muslim Sabbath. Recipes. But I would be finished with the paper in an hour.
"Can you bring me Time or Newsweek?" I asked the jail superintendent on
his weekly visit.
"They are Communist publications and are not allowed," he told me.
"They are hardly Communist, but from the center of capitalism," I argued.
"They are Communist."
"What books do you have in your library?" I tried.
"We have no library here."
As March turned into April, I began to dread the arrival of the newspaper.
The hijacking continued to be front-page news. So did the involvement of my
brother Mir. In one interview I read, Mir took responsibility for the hijacking of the
PIA plane. In another, he denied it. All the government papers insinuated,
however, that Al-Zulfikar was the armed wing of the PPP.
What a fraudulent charge. The whole premise of the PPP was to effect
change politically and peacefully, to work within a legal framework. Why else had
we pressed so for elections, entered the elections in spite of every trick Zia had
thrown at us, continued to press for elections in the face of Martial Law guns?
The hearts and loyalty of the people could never be captured by force. Even Zia
must have known that. Still the regime was continuing to twist whatever truth
there was about Al-Zulfikar to destroy the MRD, the PPP, and the Bhuttos.
Alone in my cell at Sukkur, I was being convinced that the regime was
preparing to kill me. One jail official told me nervously that I was going to be
secretly tried by a military court right here in jail and sentenced to death. Another
said that the death cells in another courtyard were being emptied in preparation
for my transfer. Security at Sukkur was being stepped up, he reported, following
rumors that my brothers were going to try to rescue me following my death
sentence. There were other rumors, too, that I was about to be moved to a
torture center in Baluchistan to extract my "confession" involving me in the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

149

hijacking of the PIA plane. "There are terrible days ahead for you," one of the
jailers whispered sympathetically to me. "You should pray for your survival."
The inspector general of jails came to Sukkur on his inspection rounds
and confirmed the rumors. "They are torturing people to get them to involve you
in Al-Zulfikar," the kind-looking, gray-haired man whispered to me, trying to
caution me of the dangers that lay ahead.
"But I am innocent. They cannot implicate me," I said naively.
The inspector general shook his head. "I have seen a boy from your own
hometown of Larkana with his toe-nails pulled out," he said, tears filling his eyes.
"I don't know how many can put up with that without breaking."
I didn't want to believe him or the jail staff. In order to survive, it was
important not to accept reality. To accept reality was to accept the threat.
Subconsciously, however, my body registered the tension. My internal problems
worsened. As there was no privacy in my cell, the jail matron had learned of my
gynecological condition soon after my arrival at Sukkur and a doctor had been
summoned. But I had been told nothing about her diagnosis.
I began to push away the food the jailers brought to me, finding it difficult
to swallow. I ate almost nothing, yet I became convinced that I was getting fat.
My stomach seemed to extend. My rib cage felt larger. I realize now I had
become anorexic.
As I lost more and more weight, the jail authorities who had been telling
me that the regime wanted to sentence me to death now became nervous that I
might die on my own. "Pack up all your things. You are being shifted to Karachi,"
the jail matron told me early the morning of April 16th, five weeks after my arrival
at Sukkur.
"Why?" I asked.
"Your health is poor. We are taking you to Karachi." At the Karachi Airport,
the police told me they were taking me home.
I was ecstatic. 70 Clifton. Pure, cool water instead of the yellow jail water.
My own bed instead of the rope cot. Four walls instead of bars. I thought my
ordeal was over. It wasn't.
"This isn't my home," I protested when, exhausted after the journey, I was
taken inside a house I'd never seen.
"We want you to see another doctor first," my police escort explained.
"Then we will take you to your house."
I looked at the unfamiliar woman coming toward me. "Why don't you take
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

150

me home where my own doctor will see me?" I said. The policemen said nothing.
The doctor had a kind face, at least. "The doctors in Sukkur think you have
uterine cancer," she told me quietly, after examining me. "I'm not sure. We'll have
to do an exploratory operation."
Cancer? At twenty-eight? I looked at her disbelievingly. Was the threat of
cancer real? Or were they just trying to disorient me again? She, like all the
doctors I had seen, was chosen by the regime.
As we talked, she was scribbling on a pad. "Don't worry. I am a friend and
sympathizer," read the note she passed me. "You can trust me." But could I? I
didn't have one reason to trust anyone.
"You said you were taking me to 70 Clifton," I told the police when we
continued on through Karachi in the jeep. "This is not the way."
"You'll go home later," they told me. "First we are taking you to visit your
mother in Karachi Central Jail."
I got very excited. I hadn't seen my mother or heard from her since our
arrests over a month ago. I needed to see if she was all right, to talk to her about
my condition, about the state of the MRD, about the charges of high treason I
was sure the regime was going to lodge against us.
"Mummy! Mummy!" I called out as I rushed into the rest house. "Mummy,
it's Pinkie. I'm here!"
There was no answer. Another lie. My mother was being held in another
ward, one jailer told me in secret. I applied to see her immediately. I never
received a reply. The next day, instead of taking me to 70 Clifton, the police took
me to a large public hospital. Its corridors were deserted, empty of the crowds of
family members who usually accompanied their relatives right up to the door of
the operating room. I felt so alone without my own family. When I woke up after
the operation, I was relieved to see my sister, Sanam, there. At least the regime
had given her permission to come.
Sanam:
The hospital was huge. I didn't know where to go or who even to ask
about my sister. As soon as I mentioned her name, everyone froze and stared at
me. I was so frightened. I hadn't been out of the house in months. Pakistan was a
terrifying place at that time, especially for anyone named Bhutto, but I had
nowhere else to go.
"Please, can you help me?" I asked one person after another in the
endless halls. Go here. Go there, they told me. Suddenly I heard a woman
screaming. "My God, it's my sister," I said to the woman next to me. "That's not
your sister. She's just here for a little operation," replied the woman, who must
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

151

have been an intelligence agent. "The woman who is screaming is in labor."
I knew it was Pinkie. I just knew it. I rushed after the sounds of the
screaming to find her being pushed rapidly down the hall from the operating room
on a hospital gurney, surrounded by policemen. There were tubes coming out of
her arms and her nose. "They're going to kill me! They're going to kill Papa," she
was shouting, still half under the anesthesia. "Stop them! Somebody, stop them!"
I saw one white hair on her head. To me that was the limit, the last straw.
She'd been locked up for so many birthdays, locked up without a single human
soul. And what had she got for it? One white hair.
I sat by her bed in the ward until she woke up. I thought they'd let me
spend the afternoon with her. They let me stay only half an hour. On the way out,
I saw her doctor. "Tell your sister she's all right," the doctor said. But I never got
the chance. That afternoon they took her back to Karachi Central Jail.
Roaring in my ears. Blackness advancing then receding. I open my eyes
in Karachi Central Jail to find a policewoman going through my handbag, taking
out the tiny notebook with my notes in it from Sukkur. "What are you doing?" I
say groggily to her. She looks at me, startled. "All right," she says, putting the
notebook back in my bag. When she leaves, a sixth sense forces me out of bed.
Feverish and delirious, I drag myself into the bathroom and burn the notebook.
Within an hour, a policeman and policewoman are back. "Your sister passed you
something. Where is it?" they demand. So that's what they think the notebook
was. "I don't know what you're talking about," I say. "You're lying," they yell at
me, going through my handbag and my few items of clothing. Their anger
increases when they find nothing.
"Get up. Hurry," two policewomen shout at me the next morning. I feel too
weak to stand. "The doctor said I shouldn't be moved for forty-eight hours," I try
to protest. The police pay no attention, throwing my few things in a bag. As they
hurry me into a car and then onto a plane, I feel myself sinking. Their voices
seem to come from far away. Waves of darkness roll toward me. Please don't let
me sink into them. I don't want to faint. But I fall into blackness. When I start to
regain consciousness several hours later in my cell at Sukkur, I hear voices.
"She's alive," I hear someone say. Another voice breaks in. She shouldn't have
been moved so soon," it says. I sink back into the darkness, but this time it is
more peaceful. I have survived.
I didn't know then how lucky I was. Jam Sadiq Ali, a former minister in the
PPP government living in political exile in London, told me years later that he'd
received a desperate call from Pakistan during my brief hospitalization. "Do
something," he was told. "They're planning to kill her on the operating table." He
had held a press conference and disclosed the threat on my life, thereby
preempting whatever plans the regime might have had to kill me.
For weeks after the operation, I remained tired and anemic at Sukkur, too
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

152

depleted to walk. The junior jail staff became much more open in their sympathy.
At great risk to themselves, they smuggled me a pen and a new notebook, as
well as a few copies of Newsweek. One even brought me some fresh fruit. I
spent as much time as possible recording events taking place outside the Sukkur
walls, writing in my notebook, on the margins of newspapers, on every scrap of
paper I could find. The jailers took the papers away with them every night in case
there was a surprise inspection. If anything was found, they would lose their jobs
or worse. I waited impatiently for the papers to be returned in the morning.
Notes from jail diaries:
April 20, 1981: "The regime-backed Urdu newspaper Jang headlined a
BBC interview with Mir Murtaza Bhutto, who said that he was in Kabul at the time
of the hijacking but he did not know about it until after it had occurred. Mir
Murtaza said his mother and sister, who are in Pakistan, had not given their
agreement to Al-Zulfikar. He was not working with the Pakistan People's Party
and had had no contact at all with his mother and sister."
April 21st: Dawn. "Radio Australia last night quoted Mir as having said in
Bombay recently that his Al-Zulfikar organization, also known as the Pakistan
Liberation Army, could 'turn Pakistan up and down' and was now pledged to
violence to oust the administration. Al-Zulfikar, Mir said, had conducted at least
fifty-four other operations inside Pakistan, including the bomb explosion in the
stadium at Karachi before the pope arrived there. Asked about reports that his
organization's headquarters were in Kabul, he replied: 'We do have a presence
there, but our headquarters are inside Pakistan.' "
My heart sank as I recorded the news items. If only I could talk to Mir, see
him. It had been five years. I only knew what he and Shah Nawaz looked like
now from pictures in the press. As much as I understood Mir's frustration and
anger, his statements, whether real or misconstrued by the regime, were making
it far more dangerous for me and other members of the PPP. Zia could use them
as a pretext to finish the PPP off. He couldn't get to my brothers, but he could get
to us.
On April 28th, Mir was listed on Pakistan's "most wanted list." And the
deputy Martial Law administrator unexpectedly came to see me during an
inspection tour of the prison. He walked into my cell accompanied by the jail
superintendent and some other official. We sat on the only two chairs.
"Why have I been detained?" I asked him.
"Because of Al-Zulfikar," he replied.
"I had nothing to do with Al-Zulfikar."
"We found the blueprint of Al-Zulfikar in your room, which gave away their
plans in detail," he said. I didn't know what he was talking about.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

153

"I never even heard of Al-Zulfikar until the hijacking," I insisted.
"It is for the court to decide about your association with Al-Zulfikar, the
stadium bombing, and Lala Assad."
Lala Assad? The vice-president of the Student's Wing in Sindh? I knew
Lala Assad. He was an engineering student in Khairpur. I couldn't believe he was
involved in Al-Zulfikar, if indeed such a group existed at all. But the regime was
obviously using Al-Zulfikar as an excuse to rid themselves of as many PPP
loyalists as possible. Another man had been arrested as an accomplice of the
hijackers, the deputy Martial Law administrator told me—Nasser Baloach. I knew
him, too. Nasser Baloach was the labor representative of the PPP in the Karachi
Steel Mills.
"What I can conclude from the talks this morning," I wrote in my diary after
the deputy Martial Law administrator left, "is that the regime thinks I conspired
with Lala Assad and the others in the stadium blast as part of Al-Zulfikar. I can
hardly believe it. It sounds so surrealistic and eerie. The innocent are persecuted.
The criminals rule. What a world."
The world grew infinitely more ominous two days later.
"Papers Prove that Bhutto Ladies Had Knowledge About the Proceedings"
read the headlines of Jang. My heart stopped beating for a second and a chill
crept up my spine. They must have been referring to the "blueprint" the deputy
Martial Law administrator claimed to have found in my room. The regime was
obviously preparing the country for another trial of the Bhuttos.
"We seem to be caught in a nightmare," I wrote in my diary on April 30th.
"First the shock of learning about Al-Zulfikar and Mir. Now the regime's
determination to make us part of what we were not. It seems so fantastic. But
then, why should it? They did the same thing with Papa. Now they want to repeat
a fraud which the world knew was a fraud. Or perhaps they think the world won't
know it's a fraud. What matters is the truth. But what opportunity does a military
court provide for showing that? Unable to defeat us politically, Zia is seeking
physical elimination and destruction." What I didn't know was the depth of
brutality the regime had sunk to in its efforts to destroy us.
Baldia Center and Division 555 in Karachi. Lahore Fort and Birdwood
Barracks in Lahore. Attock Fort in the north of Punjab. Chaklala Air Force Base
outside of Rawalpindi. Mach Jail and Khalli Camp, Baluchistan. The names of
these torture centers were creeping into the lives of PPP supporters, as well as
into the increasingly concerned reports of Amnesty International and other
human rights organizations. And all to implicate the PPP, my mother, and me in
Al-Zulfikar.
It would be years before I learned the details of what happened in these
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

154

torture centers. Chains. Blocks of ice. Chilis inserted into the prisoners' rectums.
It sickened me to hear the stories of my friends and colleagues, to have to
recognize the cruelty that human beings are capable of. But there has to be a
record of the suffering people endured under the brutality of Zia's Martial Law
regime.
Faisal Hay at, lawyer, landowner, former member of the National Assembly
from Punjab:
Four hundred police headed by the superintendent of the police and a
colonel of the army intelligence surrounded my house in Lahore on 12th April,
1981, at three-thirty in the morning. They beat the servants and broke into the
house. My sister, who was recovering from liver surgery, was dragged from her
bedroom. They dragged my mother out of her room and broke down my bedroom
door. "This is the headquarters of Al-Zulfikar," they told me, grabbing me by the
neck. "We are here to confiscate the rocket launchers, bazookas, submachine
guns, and ammunition you have stored in your basement." I looked at them
dumbstruck. "Search all you want," I said. "This is a family home, not a
headquarters. We don't even have a basement." They arrested me anyway.
I spent the first twenty-four hours in jail with no food or water. Then I was
blindfolded and taken to Lahore Fort, the 450-year-old brick-walled fort from the
time of the Moghuls. Shah Jehan, the creator of the Taj Mahal, built the beautiful
Palace of Mirrors in Lahore Fort. My family and I used to stroll in the shade of the
Summer Pavilion where the Moghul emperors created pools of water lilies. But
after the hijacking, the Lahore Fort was known only for its tortures. It became
Pakistan's answer to the Bastille in France.
There were about twenty-five to thirty of us arrested at the same time,
Jahangir Badar, additional secretary-general of the PPP Punjab, Shaukat
Mahmood, the general secretary, Nazim Shah, our finance secretary, Mukhtar
Awan, a former minister, all high government officials. It was a very miserable,
miserable state of affairs.
Every two days I was taken to be interrogated. I never knew exactly when.
They came for me at six o'clock in the morning, in the evening, in the dead of
night. I never knew. Though we were already in prison, we were taken in
handcuffs to be grilled by Brigadier Rahib Qureshi, chief of staff to the Martial
Law administrator of Punjab, and Abdul Qayyum, the chief of provincial
intelligence. The names and faces of these two men will be with me for the rest
of my life.
"We are giving you the chance of your life," they said to me while I was
forced to stand in front of them hour after hour. "You are a young man. You come
from a good family. You have a future. All you have to do is agree to testify
against Begum Nusrat Bhutto and Miss Benazir Bhutto in the hijacking case."
I refused. And their temptations escalated. "You are in politics," they said.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

155

"We will make you a minister."
"You are in textiles," they said. "Your permission to put up a new mill was
canceled because of your political activities. We will reinstate that permission
now. You will be rich."
When I continued to resist them, they changed their tactics. "We can put
you behind bars for twenty-five years," they threatened. "We are a Martial Law
government. We don't need evidence. We can convict you here and now."
I spent three months locked into a cell five feet by four feet. Being six feet,
I could never stretch out day or night. There were four identical cells in my block
with the open bars facing west. From noon on, the sun blazed in on us with no
relief, the temperature often reaching 115 degrees. There was no way to get
away from the heat. Fans were installed on pedestals outside our cells,
positioned to blow through the corridor of heat until the air reaching us seemed to
be on fire.
My lips swelled and were so painful I couldn't swallow any water. My skin
blistered and round, dark circles spread all over my body from roy face to my
toes. I had sores all over. In desperation, I tied my shirt to the bars one afternoon
to block the sun, and the guards snatched it away from me altogether. I didn't get
my shirt back for three days.
One by one the others in my cell block began to succumb to heatstroke. I
could hear them fainting and calling out in their delirium. I was the youngest,
twenty-seven then, and held out the longest. But after two months, I collapsed.
When I woke up two days later I was in an underground cellar the jail authorities
had turned into a makeshift hospital. When the doctors were sure I had regained
my senses, I was returned to my cell.
The nights soon became a bigger torment than the days. Neither I, nor
any of the others, had any bedding, not even a sheet. We had to curl up on the
broken cement floor of the cell next to the open stinking hole which served as a
toilet. Ants crawled over us, cockroaches, lizards, rats, every insect and rodent
which lives in the earth. And there was no respite from the heat. The jail
authorities installed 500-watt bulbs into the seven-foot ceilings and left the lights
on all night. They were careful to sink the sockets deep into the ceiling so none of
us could commit suicide by plunging our hands into the wiring.
My health deteriorated rapidly. The conditions were so unsanitary it's
remarkable that anyone lived. The miserable food they brought us, which we had
ten seconds to grab from a tray outside the bars, consisted of bread with pebbles
and sand in it, and thin curry encrusted with flies. I suffered from repeated bouts
of dysentery, malaria, cholera. At one point my fever went to 105. My head was
splitting with pain, the light at night slicing into my eyes so that I could not keep
myself from screaming in agony. My body alternated between burning and
freezing and I couldn't stop throwing up. For days I lay in my own vomit.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

156

"Look who is here to see you," Brigadier Qureshi and Major General
Qayyum said to me one day. I blinked at the familiar figure standing in front of me
in the interrogation room. They had brought my mother.
"Twenty-five years he will be in prison," the Martial Law administrators
said to my mother. "Twenty-five years unless he consents to testify against the
Bhuttos."
My mother's face was streaming with tears. She was a broken lady, her
brother-in-law tortured and driven into exile, her son almost destroyed, our
ancestral agricultural lands brown and withered because the regime had cut off
our water supply. But in spite of the fact that she was a lady of soft heart and
very kind soul, she showed an inner strength that day I had never seen before.
"Don't let them intimidate you, Faisal," she said to me right in front of
them. "Don't let them force you into going against your will. You must do what
your conscience tells you to."
"I have put my faith in God," I told her. "These men are merely human
beings. If it is God's destiny for me to spend twenty-five years in prison, I can't
help it. But I will not betray the trust of the Bhutto family."
I couldn't betray them. None of the political prisoners in Lahore Fort could.
We all came from good families with long histories of religious and government
service. We were educated. We had names in society. We couldn't have lied and
then lived with the dishonor, in spite of all the regime's temptations and threats.
Not one of the former government officials agreed to give false evidence
against the Bhuttos. After three months the authorities finally gave up and
transferred us to local district jails. I was sent to Gujran-wala Jail forty miles north
of Lahore for another two months. The regime didn't dare release us back directly
into society from Lahore Fort. Even they would have been embarrassed by our
condition.
Qazi Sultan Mahmood, former employee of Flashman's Hotel, Rawalpindi,
general secretary of the PPP in Rawalpindi City:
I had already spent one year's rigorous imprisonment in Central Jail
Mianwali for leading processions in protest of Chairman Bhutto's death sentence.
I had also been fired without compensation from my position at the hotel because
of my work with the PPP. After the hijacking I was arrested again and taken first
to Rawalpindi Jail, then Gujranwala Jail, and then to the Lahore Fort. It was a
terrible place.
"Tell us the connection between Miss Bhutto and Al-Zulfikar," the jail
authorities asked me over and over. When I said she had never talked to me
about it, that I knew nothing about the hijacking, they whipped me with leather
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

157

straps and beat me on the head with bamboo rods. That was just the beginning.
I am a very small man, three feet high and weighing forty-eight pounds. So
it was easy for them to make great sport of me. When I refused to support their
lies, they put heavy handcuffs on me and told me to raise my arms over my
head. My arms are quite short and when I fell down from the effort, they stepped
on me, laughing uproariously. Often, they picked me up by the flesh on my
stomach and either hurled me to the ground, or tossed me back and forth
between them like a ball.
They blindfolded me and led me around, I don't know where. "You are
going to die now unless you confirm the Bhutto ladies' involvement with AlZulfikar," they told me during these sessions. When I refused they held me by
one foot and hung me over the high walls of the prison. "Why do you want to
die?" they said. "Just sign this confession." "Go ahead and kill me," I told them.
"But I can't tell you what I don't know."
For thirty-five days they tortured me like this constantly. One of their
favorite cruelties was to make me stand naked in front of them, then to weave a
pole between my legs and tell me to hang on to it. It was not possible for me to
stay in this position for even two or three minutes and I would pitch forward on
my face. Blood would spurt from my nose and my teeth, making them laugh.
"Oh, you are a very important leader," they taunted me. "What was it
about you that Mr. Bhutto liked? Is there something special? You are the sort of
man people should hate. You are not a beautiful chap. The something special
must be that you are doing something secret with Al-Zulfikar." Then they would
kick and beat me. The wounds on my back, on my legs, on my hands became
infected, but they wouldn't let me see a doctor.
I spent another thirty-five days in solitary confinement, locked in total
darkness. I was just left in the dirt, in a living grave. I was given very little food,
one rusk of bread and perhaps a chapatti with thin lentil sauce. They dropped the
food through the small hole in the cell door. I was not tall enough to reach the
opening so I had to scrape the food out of the dirt. They dropped my one cup of
tea a day as well. I tried to catch the cup, but it almost always spilled. If I was
lucky, I got one or two sips. My head and feet were often scalded.
When I was released after two months, I addressed a reception for other
political prisoners in Rawalpindi. My speech dwelt on the horrible conditions and
treatment of political prisoners under General Zia. The Guardian carried the story
in England, as did the Associated Press all over the world. I was arrested again
and kept in solitary confinement in Kot Lakhpat Jail for two years and four
months. A military summary court then sentenced me to three years' hard labor
in Multan Central Jail, then Attock Jail. I was finally released on June 15, 1985.
My nephews have been supporting me ever since because I am still
blacklisted by the government. But I continue to work for the PPP. I will never
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

158

give in. I will not leave Benazir Bhutto while I am alive.
Pervez All Shah, now senior vice-president of the Sindh PPP, then a leading
member of the Sindh PPP and former publisher and chief editor of Javed, a
weekly magazine:
March 24, 1981. I was playing a game of cricket with my sons when an
unmarked car drove up and men in plainclothes told me to get in. They said they
were police but had no warrant. They took me away without telling my family
where I was going.
I had been arrested three times before, the first time with my sixty -twoyear-old father on October 1, 1977, the day Zia first canceled the elections. Then
cars and jeeps full of police had come to our home in Khairpur in interior Sindh,
where I was running for the Provincial Assembly on a PPP ticket. "Get moving,"
the police ordered us, handcuffing my father's arm to mine and parading us
through the streets while the cars and jeeps followed behind. People gathered on
the footpaths in amazement to watch us walk by. Common criminals weren't
treated this way, much less members of respectable families. At first I felt so
ashamed that I took my handkerchief and tried to cover up the cuffs. But when I
saw that there were tears in the people's eyes I took the kerchief off. After I had
been sleeping on the floor of the police station for twenty-five days, a major
released me but sentenced my father to a year in Sukkur Jail.
A year later, when thousands in Khairpur began courting arrest to call for
Mr. Bhutto's release, they came again. This time I wasn't home, though the police
looking for me even entered the women's quarters, which for generations no
outsider had ever entered. They pulled the clothes out of the cupboards, and
emptied drawers on the floor. They finally arrested me at a friend's wedding I was
attending, and put me in a cell ten feet by seven feet with twenty-one others. I
was charged with arson, though when they could find no witnesses they
sentenced me to a year in jail for inciting crowds.
But the arrest in 1981 was the worst. I was blindfolded and driven the six
hours from Karachi to Khairpur Central Jail, where I was held for three days
without food. Then I was moved again, first to Hyderabad, and then in the middle
of the night back to Frere police station in Karachi. "At least give me a cup of
tea," I begged the police. "You'll get everything you need at 555," they told me;
555 was notorious, the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency in
Karachi.
Once again I was loaded into a police van. This time I was released into a
pitch-black cell whose ceiling just touched my head. "Watch out," voices cried out
as my foot trod on other prisoners. I don't know how long we all huddled there in
the darkness.
I was taken to Colonel Salim, the head of Interservices Intelligence. He
handed me a piece of paper and a pencil. "Write down that Miss Benazir is the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

159

leader of the bomb blast and that Begum Bhutto is involved in the hijacking," he
told me. "How can I write something I don't know," I answered. He asked again. I
refused. He called in Lala Khan, the famous torturer of 555, who strapped my
legs to a wooden rack, and began to rap my kneecaps with a long wooden stick.
The pain built and built until tears ran down my cheeks. "I don't know anything
about the bomb blast or the hijacking," I begged. Lala kept hitting. When he
finished I could not move either leg. "Stand up, or you will never be able to walk
again," he told me coldly.
I was moved to another cell. Often members of the four different branches
of intelligence came to ask me to implicate Benazir and Begum Sahiba. When I
refused, they called Lala.
Sometimes he made me watch while he hung others upside down and
beat them until they screamed. Sometimes I was tied to the ceiling so that just
my toes touched the floor and left to hang there for hours. Often at night guards
stationed around my cell kept me from sleeping, asking me silly questions like my
name and jabbing me with sticks if I didn't respond. When I was completely
exhausted and starving from the two glasses of water and watery lentils I was
given every day, I would be called in to have lunch with an interrogator. "Look at
yourself. You're an educated man from a good family," they would say as I sat in
my filthy jail clothes over a sumptuous lunch and glasses of hot tea. "Why make
things hard? Just say that Benazir and Begum Bhutto were involved in the
hijacking and all this will be over." When I refused, I was taken away and
tortured.
After three months I was moved to Karachi Central Jail, and later to
Khairpur, where my family was allowed a monthly visit. In the seven times I was
hauled before a military court, the regime produced no witnesses and framed no
charges. In February of 1985, the regime finally sentenced me to a year's
imprisonment for "propagating political opinions prejudicial to the ideology,
integrity, and security of Pakistan." No allowance was made for the almost four
years I had already spent in prison. My wife had a nervous breakdown under the
strain of trying to manage our small business in Karachi and raise our three
children.
Pervez Ali Shah was adopted as a "prisoner of conscience" by Amnesty
International. In the dreadful period following the formation of the MRD and the
hijacking, so were many others. Throughout 1981, Amnesty reported, the number
of political prisoners being tortured in Pakistan increased dramatically. Most of
the victims were students, political party workers, trade unionists, and lawyers
belonging to political parties. But the hijacking brought a new category of prisoner
as well. "In 1981, for the first time, Amnesty International received press reports
that four women political prisoners had been tortured," stated Amnesty's report
covering this period. "Nasira Rana and Begurn Arif Bhatti, the wives of PPP
officials; Farkhanda Bukhari, a PPP member; and Mst. Safooran, mother of six." I
knew them all.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

160

Nasira Rana, April 13th, Lahore:
My husband, who was a member of the MRD, was in Karachi in early April
when the police suddenly burst into my living room. "Who are you?" I said in a
fright to the man holding a rifle to my head. He was not wearing a uniform, but an
open shirt and black pants. I can still see the gold chain he had around his neck.
"I will tell you who I am," he said menacingly. "I am a major in the Pakistan
army." He was pressing the gun into my forehead, hurting me. I pushed it away.
He took the rifle butt and hit me with it, breaking the bones in my hand and finger
while my twelve-year-old daughter screamed.
"Where is your husband?" he demanded, while other army men ransacked
the house. "He is not here," I told him. He raised his rifle butt again. "Where is the
door to the secret passageway?" he said. "There is no secret passageway," I
replied. He locked my daughter and me in a room and finally they went away.
They came back fifteen days later.
"Come with us. You are under arrest," said the Additional Superintendent
Police and the local magistrate.
"Where are your warrants?" I asked them.
"We are the warrants," they replied.
They took me to jail where I was forced to stand the whole night. Every
hour a new interrogator was brought in.
"Your husband is a member of Al-Zulfikar, as are Benazir Bhutto and
Begum Bhutto. We know this to be a fact. Confirm. Confirm."
Hours passed. But I was adamant. Whatever they said, I would have
resolve. I felt my knees begin to buckle. I reached for the chair right beside me.
"Get away!" they shouted.
Two days later, I was taken to Lahore Fort, where I was locked in a tiny
cell with another political prisoner. Begum Bhatti, whose husband had been a
provincial minister as well as the revenue minister for the Punjab.
Begum Bhatti:
Eleven different government agencies interrogated us. "Where are your
husbands?" they kept yelling. "They are terrorists, working with the Bhutto
ladies."
The jail official kept us awake all night, our third without rest. "No sleep,
Mrs. Rana," they yelled into our cell, banging the bars with clubs. "Wake up,
Begum Bhatti."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

161

The next day they took us to Major General Qayyum, the chief of
intelligence. The same questions. The same answers. At one point Major
General Qayyum grabbed me by the hair and smashed my head against the wall.
"Where is your husband?" he yelled at me.
"I don't know."
He held cigarettes to our arms until we could smell the burning of our own
flesh.
"Where are your husbands?"
I began to faint. From a distance I heard Nasira scream.
"We'll break you!" Major General Qayyum yelled, the last words I heard
before blacking out. Nasira:
We were in the Lahore Fort for five weeks, the hottest part of the year.
The heat of the sun was merciless. "Now you'll tell us what we want," they said,
leaving us under guard in the central courtyard at noon. We stood there for
hours, black spots dancing before our eyes, heads aching, tongues swelling. The
guards drank water in front of us, laughing. One hour passed. Another. Who
knows how long we stood there. The guard changed every three hours.
Three times they took us to a special room. Wet sponges were tied around
our wrists, and wires were run through them. Every few seconds, they sent
electric shocks through the wires, one after another after another. Our bodies
twitched, went rigid. My broken hand was in a cast and was particularly sensitive.
I finally screamed, I couldn't help it. "We'll bring your father to be tortured," they
threatened. "We'll bring your daughter." The shocks went on for two hours.
Begum Bhatti:
We had no bed in our cell and no bedding. They gave us a gunny-sack.
When I went to lay it on the floor, a three-foot snake wiggled out. "Don't scream,"
I hissed at Nasira as much as to myself. Somehow, the snake made me the
angriest. I grabbed it up in the sack, mashed it against the wall, then twisted its
neck. The policewoman screamed when she saw it.
The authorities tried to make us sign a statement that they were not
responsible for the snake, that the snake had gotten into the cell on its own. We
refused to sign it.
Implicate Benazir. Implicate Begum Sahiba. Implicate your husbands, our
interrogation continued. "If your wife were in my position, would she tell?" I asked
the interrogator. "Yes," he said. "Then she is a very shameful woman," I said.
Nasira:
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

162

I got word from one of the guards that my husband had been captured and
brought to the Fort. I don't know what they did to him. I don't want to know. He
had a heart attack after he was tortured. He turned blue and gasped for breath.
They took him to the hospital because they didn't want it said he died under
torture. It was a miracle he survived.
I didn't know about any of these tortures in my isolation at Sukkur. I didn't
know that Dr. Niazi, at the urging of his wife and family after the hijacking, had
fled Pakistan minutes before the police came to arrest him for the third time. He
suffered a near-fatal heart attack in Kabul from the strain and barely survived
bypass surgery in London, where he would remain until 1988.
Yasmin, too, barely escaped arrest at the same time. "Is Yasmin Niazi at
home?" the police had asked at the family's gate. "No," Yasmin had the presence
to say. When the police decided to take her mother instead, Yasmin and Mrs.
Niazi had a brief and whispered fight. "I'm going to tell them who I am," Yasmin
said to her mother out of hearing of the police. "Yasmin, if you do this I will die.
So either you have me in prison or you have my dead body. You can choose
which you want," Mrs. Niazi replied. Yasmin stayed quiet as the police took Mrs.
Niazi to Rawalpindi District Jail, where she was held with three other women in
the cell directly across from my father's former death cell. For the five days of
Mrs. Niazi's imprisonment, the cell was so crowded the women had to take turns
sleeping.
Yasmin went into hiding for three months while the police continued to
search for her. She was in great danger. In very poor health and worried about
his daughter, Dr. Niazi prepaid a PIA airline ticket for Yasmin to join him in
London. But how to get her out of the country? After her release from prison,
Mrs. Niazi called the British embassy. Yasmin had luckily been born in England
and the embassy said they could get her a British passport within forty-eight
hours if Mrs. Niazi could find the passport Yasmin had traveled on with her as an
infant. Mrs. Niazi found the eighteen-year-old passport in the bottom of a box in
their basement.
"I couldn't go to the airport with Yasmin because I was afraid I'd be
recognized. I put a burqa over her and sent her with her sister," Mrs. Niazi told
me years later in a voice that still trembled. "Yasmin was wanted on Zia's
personal orders. There were arrest orders on her in Islamabad. She was wanted
in every province. There wasn't a list that didn't have her name on it. She got out
by an act of God."
"There's no entry visa on your passport," the immigration officer said to
Yasmin at the airport. "That's very odd," Yasmin bluffed. "There must be a
mistake." As he turned to look up her name on a list, the lights suddenly went out
in the airport. For over a minute the airport was plunged into darkness, creating
chaos among the passengers trying to reach their flights. When the lights came
back on, the immigration officer was in such a hurry that he just stamped her
Passport quickly and sent her through.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

163

Yasmin made it safely to London, where she later married my cousin
Tariq, himself a political refugee. They would not return to Pakistan for seven
years.
The heat reached Sukkur in May, a dry, searing heat which turned my cell
into an oven. The winds blew constantly through the open sides of my cell, winds
heated to 110 degrees, 120 degrees, by the surrounding desert of Interior Sindh.
A constant dust storm swirled in my cell. Sticky with sweat, I was often coated
with grit.
My skin split and peeled, coming off my hands in sheets. More boils
erupted on my face. The sweat dripped into them, burning like acid. My hair,
which had always been thick, began to come out by the handful. I had no mirror,
but I could feel my scalp with my fingertips, damp, gritty, and naked. Every
morning I would find new clumps of hair on my pillow.
Insects crept into the cell like invading armies. Grasshoppers. Mosquitoes.
Stinging flies. Bees. They were forever buzzing in my face or crawling up my
legs. I flailed my arms to keep them away, but there were so many it was often
useless. Bugs came up through the cracks in the floor and through the open bars
from the courtyard. Big black ants. Cockroaches. Seething clumps of little red
ants. Spiders. I tried pulling the sheet over my head at night to hide from their
bites, pushing it back when it got too hot to breathe.
Water. I dreamed of cool, clear water. The jail water I was given to drink
was pale brown or yellow. It smelled like stale eggs, and did not taste like water
or quench my thirst. But the jail authorities cut off the fresh water Mujib, a lawyer
who lived nearby, had tried to send to me. "It is for your own good," the jail
superintendent told me. "These people are your enemies. Your own party leaders
want you out of the way." On another day, he told me that instead of delivering
the fresh oranges Mujib sent me, he had eaten them himself. "It was to save your
life," he added. "He could have injected them with poison." It was theater of the
absurd.
"Can you please provide me with bug spray?" I asked the jail authorities.
"Oh, no," they said. "It is poisonous. We wouldn't want anything to happen
to you."
What was all the talk about poison? I suddenly realized they were
implanting the idea of suicide in my head. What tidier solution could there be for
the regime than to announce that Benazir Bhutto had killed herself? Problem
solved. The proof came in the shape of a bottle of Phenyle, a strong cleaning
detergent left all the time in my cell. The label was covered with a picture of a
skull and crossbones. "Be sure not to leave it in her cell," the jail superintendent
said loudly to the woman who cleaned the cell, each time he came on his weekly
visit. "Don't let the Phenyle out of your sight. She might want to end her misery."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

164

But the bottle of poison remained where it was.
My ear began to trouble me again, my chronic condition being aggravated
by the dust and sweat trickling constantly down my face. But the jail doctor kept
telling me nothing was wrong. "You are in solitary confinement and under a great
deal of stress," he calmed me. "Many people in your situation imagine aches and
pains where there are none." I began to half believe him. Maybe I was just
imagining the clicks which disturbed me night and day. If only it weren't so hot.
"My dearest Pinkie," my mother wrote me from Karachi Central Jail on
May 23rd, telling me about her recipe for the heat. "I pour water three to four
times a day over myself to beat the heat. You should try it. I first bend my head
and pour mugs of water on the back of my neck and on top of my head, then all
over with my clothes on. Then I sit on my bed under the fan and it is so cooling
until the clothes dry. As a matter of fact, even after the clothes dry, one is kept
cool for quite some time thereafter. With this method you don't get prickly heat
(rash). It's just marvelous. I strongly recommend it. ... With love, your Mummy."
I followed her suggestion, dumping the entire bucket of water over my
head every morning. It was much hotter in Sukkur than it was in Karachi, and I
had no fan. But for the hour it took my clothes to dry in the hot wind, I was
comfortable, little realizing that as more water seeped into my ear, the infection
was growing. "You're just imagining it," the jail doctor continued to say soothingly.
He wasn't a specialist. I'll never know whether he did it deliberately or out of
ignorance.
Two hundred fifty stationary runs. Forty bending exercises. Swing the
arms. Twenty deep breaths. Read the papers. Ignore the ongoing stories
attempting to implicate my mother and me in the hijacking. Concentrate instead
on the embroidery kit Mujib and his wife, Almas, had sent in to me, cloth, thread,
and a pattern book.
"I have finished a trolley cloth and four napkins," I noted in my diary in
mid-May. "When I'm free I can bore everyone with 'and this is what I did in jail.'
On a less frivolous note, the concentration that needlework requires does not
permit wandering thoughts. Moreover, in the vacuum of solitary confinement, it
provides a point of focus, something to do, something to build the day about and
so it has a salutary effect."
I forced myself to write at least an hour a day in my journal. "Francois
Mitterand has been elected by France to become the first socialist president of
postwar France," I noted in my diary on May 11th. "The Anglo-American media
had run quite a ferocious anti-Giscard campaign. This election will have farreaching effects on the politics of Europe. France may become embroiled in
internal controversies while adjusting to socialist policies. This will take the thrust
out of aggressive French foreign policy. Who will step in to fill the French
influence amongst the Arab and African nations? How will France's relationship
with the Federal Republic of Germany shape up now that the partnership of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

165

'technocrats' and 'friends,' Giscard and Schmidt, is broken? What of the spillover
effect in Italy?"
On the same day I noted the death of Bobby Sands, an Irish political
dissident. "After sixty-six days of hunger strike, Bobby Sands finally fell victim to
death in a British jail. To the British, Bobby Sands was a terrorist. But to his
country, Bobby Sands fought for political liberty and rights. It is the story of the
world." Too often, though, I would let days go by without writing at all. "I have not
written properly over a period of time," I chided myself in my diary on June 8th. "It
is no use asking myself what there is to write about because the news from the
papers can always be summarized. Without writing one loses the flow of
expression and familiarity with words and sentences as well as the ability to
express ideas."
Slowly but surely, I settled into a pattern. "Each hour has passed more
slowly than a day or a week and yet I have come so far," I noted on June 11th. "
'Adjusted' is not the right word. I cannot adjust to a situation which is abhorrent.
To adjust is to give in. I have coped. Each moment has dragged, but it has also
passed. God alone has helped me in this ordeal. Without Him, I would have
perished."
My detention at Sukkur was to end at noon on June 12th. I had no idea
whether I'd be set free or detained longer in Sukkur, possibly to face trial and
execution. "Death comes in the end and I do not fear it," I wrote in my notes.
"The animals in the regime can only eliminate people. They cannot eliminate
concepts. The concept of democracy will survive. And in the inevitable victory of
democracy, we will live again. At least I will be free from the monotony of solitary
confinement where one lives, but does not live."
At 11 A.M. on the day my detention was to end, the order from the deputy
Martial Law administrator arrived. He was "pleased," he wrote, to give me a new
detention order. My incarceration at Sukkur was extended until September 12th.
June 21, 1981, my twenty-eighth birthday, Sukkur Central Jail—my sister,
Sanam:
I was given permission to visit my sister on her birthday, her third in
detention. My flight from Karachi was delayed, leaving me only an hour to see
her. I was crying when I finally reached her cell, I was so frustrated. I had been
searched and searched and searched. The prison matrons had gone through my
hair, which was very short at the time, emptied my pocketbook, turned every
page of the Cosmopolitan magazine I was bringing her. They even made me
taste the food I had brought my sister to make sure it wasn't poisoned. "I won't
have any time with her at all," I protested as the jailers slowly unlocked and
relocked the four gates between her and the jail walls. They just wanted to hurt
her, even on her birthday.
She received me like a gracious hostess and I, an honored guest. On that
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

166

day she had been sent some oranges by a friend in Sukkur and she offered me
one, apologizing that she had no plate to put it on, or a knife to peel it with.
"They're afraid I'll slit my wrists," she smiled. I felt so guilty. There I was, crying
and complaining about my frustrating journey. And there she was in the furnace
of Sukkur, not complaining at all. She looked so ill, so skinny. I saw to my horror
that her hair , had gotten thin. I could see her scalp.
"Tell me the gossip," she said, as if we were back in our bedrooms at
home. I did have something very important to tell her, but there was a big burly
policeman sitting right outside the open bars and a policewoman in the cell with
us, listening to every word we said. There was no place to sit but her bed. I
leaned close to her.
"Nasser wants to marry me," I whispered.
"Don't let them whisper!" the policeman said, gripping the bars of the cell.
The policewoman moved toward us. "Oh, Sunny, that's wonderful news.
I'm so happy for you," my sister said.
The policewoman moved closer, putting her face practically between my
sister and me.
"I don't want to get married with both you and Mummy in jail," I told my
sister quietly. "I told Nasser we should wait until I have my family around me
again."
"But that's just why you shouldn't wait," Pinkie told me. "Who knows when
we'll get out. We've both been worried about you living alone. You'll be much
happier with the protection of a husband. And we'll feel more secure about you."
"Oh Pinkie, why does it have to be this way?" I said, putting my arms
around her.
"No! No!" the policeman shouted. The policewoman pulled us apart,
putting her foot up on the bed to separate us.
"For goodness sake," Pinkie said. "We are not talking politics, but personal
family news. I haven't seen my sister for months. It's my birthday. Can't you give
us some privacy?"
The policeman ignored her, busy scribbling notes about our conversation
in his notebook. For the rest of the hour, the policewoman stood between us. I
could barely keep from crying again when I had to leave her all alone in that
barren, empty cell with those horrible people. "I wish you and Nasser much
happiness," she called after me. "Happy birthday. Pinkie," I managed to call back
while the policeman hurried me away.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

167

To Miss Benazir Bhutto Sukkur Central Jail
From Begum Nusrat Bhutto Karachi Central Jail June 9th, 1981
My darling Baby,
By the time this second letter of mine reaches you, it will be near your
Birthday. My memory has taken me back to the day when I was happily informed
by the doctor in England where your father was studying that I was pregnant. Oh!
How excited and happy we were. You were our first born, our love. How we
celebrated at the good news. Then at Pinto's hospital in Karachi I couldn't sleep
the night after you were born because I just wanted you to be in my arms and to
stare at your beautiful golden curls, your rosy face, your beautiful long-fingered
hands. My heart fluttered at the sight of you.
When Papa arrived from England, you were three months old. He was shy
in front of his parents but when we were alone, he stared and stared at you, then
touched your face and hands, looking with wonder at the miracle of having such
a lovely baby. He wanted to know how to hold you and I lifted you and gave you
to him, telling him "one hand under her head and another around her body." He
said you looked just like him. How thrilled he was. He went round and round in a
circle in the room with you in his arms—I can't go on into more details because
my eyes are filled with tears for the beautiful days gone by.
I remember the day you took your first step when you were only 10
months old. I remember the day you talked intelligently a week before your first
birthday in Quetta; the day I took you to nursery school at the age of only three
and a half; the pretty little dresses I used to sew and embroider with love and
affection, praying after each of my five daily prayers for your future happiness,
health and long life.
Now June 21st is here and I wish you a very happy birthday, with many,
many, many more to come. I cannot give you a little gift, not even a little kiss
being locked up so far away from each other for another 90 days. . . . I hope, my
love, you eat a proper diet and drink lots of water. Don't forget to eat fruit and
vegetables also. I end with my wishes for a good future for you.
Your ever loving
Mummy
Fruits and vegetables. Water. What nice thoughts from a mother. I felt
terrible for her. A new detention order. How long were they going to make her
suffer?
My own new detention order had elevated me to "A" class, entitling me to
a radio, television set, a refrigerator, which I imagined filled with chilled, pure
water, and an air conditioner. I was briefly thrilled, though I couldn't figure out
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

168

how a totally open cell could be air conditioned. I needn't have bothered. The
only privilege my much-touted elevation to "A" class brought me was the freedom
to wander around the compound courtyard at night. No longer, the jail
superintendent told me as if it were a great gift, would I be locked in my cell at
night. "I decline your 'A' class status," I wrote the jail superintendent. "I will not be
party to your lies."
I dreamed of being free. I dreamed of eating steak and mushrooms at the
Sorbonne restaurant in Oxford. I dreamed of fresh apple cider in New England
and peppermint stick ice cream from Brigham's. My father had passed the time in
his death cell by conjuring up someone he knew, then remembering every single
detail about him. I thought of Yolanda Kodrzycki, my roommate at Radcliffe, who
the last time I'd heard was working as an economist in Massachusetts. I thought
of Peter Galbraith, who was now working for the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee in Washington and had married his longtime girlfriend and another of
my classmates, Anne O'Leary. I had introduced them to each other at Harvard.
The time droned on. "These days will pass," my father had told me in prison.
"What is important is that we pass them with honor."
I didn't have his patience. I had to get out of there. I just had to. General
Abbasi, the Martial Law administrator of Sindh, Sunny told me, had said that the
regime was out to crush us physically, morally, and financially. They had moved
on the latter, filing a civil suit in May to sell 70 Clifton, Al-Murtaza, our agricultural
lands, and other properties at public auction. I had no idea what had happened. If
I lived, would I still have a home to return to, would I ever sleep in my own bed
again? As the summer heat baked on, I became obsessed with getting myself
transferred to 70 Clifton or Al-Murtaza. Somehow I felt that my physical presence
in either of our homes would prevent the regime from seizing them. My repeated
requests, not surprisingly, were turned down. "We can't spare that many guards,"
they told me, as if it required an entire regiment to detain one young woman in
her home.
The jail superintendent started a new tactic to demoralize me. "Your party
officials are deserting you," he told me, telling me stories about members of the
PPP meeting with members of the opposition parties, or even with the regime
itself. "They are all leaving you. Why are you wasting your life here? If you give
up politics, your troubles will be over."
I prayed to God to give me strength. "If I am the only person left resisting
the tyranny of the regime, then so be it," I told them. "I don't believe your lies.
Even if everybody else capitulates, I will not." I didn't believe the PPP leaders,
some of whom had been released by July, would desert the party. I did not allow
myself to believe it.
I started to pray a special prayer for my release that one of the jail matrons
told me about. "Qul Huwwa Allahu Ahad, Say He Is One God," I started the 112th
sura of the Quran, reciting the verse forty-one times, then breathing over a mug
of water and sprinkling a little of the water in each of the four corners of the cell. I
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

169

prayed for every prisoner. I prayed for my mother. I prayed for myself. By the
fourth Wednesday, the jail matron told me, the prison door was supposed to
open. And it did.
On the fourth Wednesday of the fourth month of my detention in Sukkur,
my cell door opened and the jail authorities took me to see my mother briefly in
Karachi. Four Wednesdays of rituals after that it was my mother's cell door which
opened. She was released from detention in July after throwing up blood. The jail
doctors diagnosed her as having an ulcer. She had a bad cough as well, which
they thought might be TB.
I knew nothing about my mother's health, and only found out about her
release from a jail matron. I was thrilled that my prayer had worked and
redoubled my efforts at Sukkur, adding additional prayers and sprinkling more
and more water for other prisoners, including myself. "Allahu Samad," the Eternal
God. A few Wednesdays later, the cell door opened again. "You're leaving," the
matron told me.
I threw my things together. Please God, I prayed, let them take me home
to 70 Clifton.
The convoy of army and police didn't go near 70 Clifton. Instead they took
me to Karachi Central Jail, and locked me up in my mother's old cell.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

170

9
LOCKED I MY
MOTHER'S OLD CELL
AT KARACHI
CE TRAL JAIL
August 15, 1981.
Flaking cement. Iron bars. And silence. Utter silence. I am back in total
isolation, the cells around me in the locked ward all emptied. I strain for the
sound of a human voice. There is only silence.
The cell is hot in the damp, humid weather of Karachi, and the ceiling fan
provides no relief. The electricity is off again. Every day the power fails,
sometimes for three hours, sometimes for longer. The jail authorities tell me the
difficulty is in the main power station. But I know that's not true. At night I can see
the sky lit up by lights in other parts of the jail. Only my cell block is in darkness.
The authorities have put me in a Class A cell reserved for high-ranking
political prisoners, but once again I am not allowed A-class privileges. The cells
to the right and left of mine, ordinarily used as a sitting room and kitchen, are
now empty and locked. The cell in which I am held is small and dirty. The "toilet"
has no flush, and swarms with roaches and flies. Its stench mingles with that of
the open sewer which runs through the jailyard outside. The only water bucket is
coated with dead bugs.
In the mornings I hear the jangling of keys and clicking of locks, which
signal the arrival of my food. Without saying a word, the gray-uniformed jail
matron who sleeps in the courtyard at the far end of the cells brings me the tiffin
boxes of food which the authorities allow to be sent from 70 Clifton. My throat
tightens the first few times I open them to find carefully prepared creamed
chicken with mushrooms, kebabs, and chicken sheeks. Though I have little
appetite, and can take only a few mouthfuls, I keep thinking of the care my
mother has taken to have the food made in our kitchen at home.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

171

I am worried about my mother. She was allowed to visit me my second
week in Karachi Central Jail and though I was relieved to see her alive, I was
shocked by her appearance. The pale, haggard woman with her nervous
movements and gray hair parted in the middle and tied in a plait looked so
different from the elegant and self-confident woman I knew as my mother.
Her eyes had filled with tears when she saw me, still a captive in her old
cell. But we both tried bravely to smile, ignoring the jailers who crowded around
us to listen to the news she hesitantly delivered. She caught a cough in jail, she
told me quietly. She thought it was the dust, but then she started coughing up
blood. After several visits, the jail doctor and the authorities told her they
suspected tuberculosis, a diagnosis which came as no surprise. Many people in
Pakistan have tuberculosis, their lungs irritated from the constant dust, their
systems depleted from malnutrition. The unsanitary conditions in jail make the
inmates especially susceptible to TB as well as to all other sorts of diseases. The
prisoners often spit on the ground, releasing the viruses into the air.
Her own doctor's suspicions were even worse, my mother told me.
Though she was still too weak for the bronchoscopy necessary for a diagnosis,
he was not ruling out lung cancer. Lung cancer. I embraced her, trying not to
register my shock, trying to be strong both for my mother and for the intelligence
agents among the jailers who I knew would report back to General Zia.
"Perhaps it is not lung cancer. Wait for the bronchoscopy," I consoled her
in the firmest voice I could muster.
"He thinks it can be cured if treated in time," she continued. "If necessary,
I can get treatment abroad."
"You must go as soon as you can," I heard myself saying, though inside
my heart was breaking at the thought of her leaving Pakistan.
"But what about you, my darling. How can I leave you here alone?"
I assured her that I was fine. But I wasn't. For three days after her visit I
lay on my bed staring up at the ceiling, immobilized by a sense of overwhelming,
irrational depression. I had no will to exercise, wash myself, or change my
clothes. I couldn't eat or drink. My God, I thought, I've lost my father. Now I'm
losing my mother. I knew I was being self-pitying, but I couldn't shake my sense
of abandonment. Even my mother's good news, that Sanam and Shah would be
having their weddings in the fall, deepened my despair. During my father's
imprisonment he had cautioned us never to give the appearance that we were
enjoying ourselves. "If you go to the movies, wear a burqa," he had instructed
me. Now my family seemed to have reconciled themselves to my being
permanently in jail. They were carrying on with their lives and having wedding
celebrations as if I didn't exist.
After three days without water I felt weak and disoriented. Don't play into
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

172

Zia's hands and fall apart, a voice in my head warned me. I felt better after I
forced myself to take a mug ful of water from the water bucket, and to begin a
puzzle in one of the Pakistani newspapers which my mother sent to the cell every
day and which for days I'd ignored. But the newsprint looked fuzzy. I felt the
beginnings of one of the migraine headaches I had developed since moving to
Karachi Central Jail. My teeth and gums ached, as did my ear. And my hair
continued to fall out.
My health problems, I learned later from a doctor, were due partly to a
breakdown in the harmony of the body's systems. Normally, he told me, the
cardiovascular, muscular, digestive, respiratory, and nervous systems each take
their due share of energy and food intake. In times of stress, however, the
nervous system goes on alert, diverting more than its share from the other
systems and weakening them. Particularly vulnerable was the heart, which
explained why so many political prisoners suffered heart attacks. Our wills may
have remained strong, but our bodies were paying the price. There was so much
uncertainty.
September 13th was not far away, the day my detention order was due to
end. Several times the jail matron had whispered to me that she had heard of
political prisoners being released. If the regime had begun freeing the people
arrested after the hijacking, why shouldn't I be freed too?
There was no longer any mention in the press of my mother's and my
alleged connection with Al-Zulfikar. Despite all its tortures and planted
"evidence," the regime had not been able to concoct a case against us that
would hold up in the court of world opinion. And Zia could not risk losing the
potential largesse of the West, especially the United States.
Pakistan had not received aid from the United States since 1979, when,
suspicious that Pakistan was developing or already possessed nuclear capability,
the Carter administration enforced its nuclear non-proliferation policies and cut
Pakistan off. But that was before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Now Zia
was successfully banking on the presence of the Russians right on Pakistan's
border to overshadow America's concern about Pakistan's nuclear program.
The Reagan administration had offered Pakistan a six-year, $3.2 billion
economic and military aid package, more than twice as much as the offer Zia had
summarily dismissed from the Carter administration. To sweeten the pot, the
United States had also added what Zia really wanted: forty F-16 planes. The
package, due to come before Congress in the fall of 1981, was more than
acceptable to Zia, though a great disappointment to those of us who believed
that America's I, eagerness to bolster Pakistan against the Communist threat
should have been balanced by a concern for human rights and the restoration of
democracy.
Zia's position was being further strengthened by the hundreds of millions
of dollars in refugee relief aid Pakistan was receiving from the United States,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

173

Saudi Arabia, and China as well as from the United Nations High Commission for
Refugees, the World Food Program, and other international relief organizations.
The number of Afghan refugees trekking through the ancient traders' and
smugglers' passes of the Hindu Kush to wait out the war in Pakistan or to join the
rebel forces of the mujahideen had swelled into the millions. Refugee camps,
hospitals, schools, and service centers had been set up all along the border,
giving members of the regime the opportunity to skim the international aid
flooding into Pakistan. One U.N. official estimated that only one-third of the aid
actually reached the refugees, I would read later in Richard Reeves's book
Passage to Peshawar. Weapons sent to the mujahideen also went through
Pakistan, giving Zia and his men a chance to siphon them off into the arsenals of
the Pakistani army and take fat commissions on arms sales. Another American
journalist later told me that Washington officials expected only about a third of
them, too, to reach their intended destination.
I suspected the CIA was deeply involved in Pakistan's role in the war of
Afghanistan. But I didn't realize the extensiveness of the ClA's stake in
maintaining Zia and his regime until years later when I read Veil: The Secret
Wars of the CIA by the American journalist Bob Woodward. "No leader ruled a
country in a more precarious situation," Mr. Woodward wrote. "Most crucial was
President Zia's willingness to allow the CIA to funnel growing amounts of
paramilitary support to the Afghanistan rebels through Pakistan. [CIA director]
Casey, the CIA and the Reagan Administration all wanted Zia to stay in power
and needed to know what was going on inside his government. The CIA station
in Islamabad was the biggest in the world."
I hadn't realized the depth of CIA director Casey's interactions with Zia,
either. "Congress had made it illegal for American business to make payments or
bribes abroad to obtain business," Woodward wrote. "The payments and favors
to foreign leaders or intelligence sources were exceptions—legal bribes, Casey
realized. For example, he made certain to visit Pakistan's Zia once or twice a
year. Soon he had the closest relationship with Zia of any member of the Reagan
Administration."
All this was helping Zia transform his image from that of a hangman and a
brutal dictator to that of a "world statesman." His famous quotes, like the one to a
Daily Mail correspondent over tea in 1978— "We'll hang people. A few."—were
now replaced by his references to Pakistan as a "front line state" helping to fight
a "jihad," or holy war, against the godless Communists. The Americans were
especially willing, if not eager, to swallow Zia's new rhetoric. For the first time, I
saw a reprint of an International Herald Tribune article in the local press
describing Zia as a "benevolent dictator."
I distracted myself from the discouraging press reports by resuming my
exercise regimen, pacing up and down the narrow corridor that ran in front of the
cell block for an hour every day. Even when I had no appetite I forced down the
food sent from 70 Clifton. As August turned into September, I allowed myself a
slight feeling of optimism. Sanam's marriage had been set for the 8th, and I had
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

174

applied for permission to attend. Perhaps I might even be released.
I began to fantasize that the footsteps approaching my cell were bringing
news of my release. I fantasized as my cell block was unlocked during the
delivery of my tiffin box, and then again with the arrival of the night matron. I
fantasized at hearing the footsteps that came regularly on Monday mornings, the
light footsteps of a small, nervous man. They belonged to the jail superintendent.
Sometimes he came with his deputy, sometimes alone. His message was always
the same.
"Why do you want to ruin your life behind the walls of prison while the
other members of the party are free and enjoying themselves?" he asked me
each week. "If you agree to give up politics for a while, you will be freed."
What was the regime up to? I knew the superintendent would never dare
say such things without official support. Yet if Zia wanted to free me, he would. If
he didn't, he wouldn't. But what was the point of trying to blackmail me, to
compromise me? Did they really think I would consent? Or were they just trying
to break me as Ayub Khan had attempted to do to my father?
"You can be free tomorrow," the jail supervisor would tell me. "Only you
are keeping yourself in jail. Wouldn't you like to travel to London, to Paris? You're
a young woman, wasting her youth in prison. And for what? You can wait for your
time to come, and it will, it will."
I always felt unsettled after the jail superintendent left. Though I never had
the slightest inclination to accept his temptations, I wasn't sure of his motives. Did
he wish me well—or ill? I hated my new and necessary inclination to be
suspicious about everyone. But how else had I survived? The regime was just
trying to unbalance me, I suspected. They were trying to destabilize me further, I
decided, by making mysterious noises around my cell at night.
Whispers. Two men and a woman speaking in hushed voices. Sometimes
I woke to the sound before dawn. No one was allowed in my ward or even near
my ward except for the police. I complained to the jail authorities for deliberately
disturbing my sleep. "There is no one in your ward," the deputy superintendent
assured me. "You are imagining it."
Footsteps. A man's heavy footsteps coming closer and closer to my cell.
"Who is it?" I called out, peering at the door from under my bed sheet. Silence.
"Did you hear the footsteps?" I asked the jail matron. "I didn't hear anything," she
said. I complained to the jail officials again. "You're just imagining it," they said.
Tinkle. Tinkle. A new sound, like the jingle of bells on a woman's anklet.
Then the whispers. I woke earlier and earlier, finally couldn't go to sleep at all.
When the old jail matron was replaced by a new one, I tried again. "Don't you
hear any noises at night?" I asked the toothless, wizened old Pathan woman who
now slept in the courtyard.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

175

"Hush! Pretend you have heard nothing!" she replied, her eyes darting
from side to side, her hands nervously smoothing down her thin gray jail uniform.
"But who is it?" I asked, thrilled at last to have some confirmation.
"It is the chur-ayle," she whispered. A chur-ayle, the spirit of a woman
whose feet point backward instead of forward? "There's no such thing as a churayle," I told the matron, clinging to rationality. "Yes there is," she insisted.
"Everyone in the women's wing has heard her. Pretend you do not hear her and
she will not harm you."
Tinkle. Tinkle. That night and for many others, my reasoning vanished
altogether. Why doesn't she stay in the women's wing instead of coming into my
ward, I shivered in bed. And the noises continued.
Clank. Clank. Someone, something, was rattling what seemed to be
garbage cans outside my ward, searching through the refuse inside. Footsteps
approached my cell again, though there was no sound of the ward door being
unlocked. Ya Allah, what is that! Ya Allah, help me! I heard my empty tiffin box
being picked up right outside my door, the lid opened, the box knocked against
the wall. Allah! I gathered my nerve and rushed to the cell door. The tiffin box
was upended in the dirt. There was no one there.
"You're under a lot of stress," the jail superintendent told me the next time
he visited. Finally he told me that my cell block had been built over a phansi ghat,
a former hanging ground used by the British. "Maybe it is some soul who has not
found rest," the jailer suggested. The thought was not comforting. Neither was
the explanation offered by the Pathan matron. "My husband was a night
watchman and he was murdered by thieves," she told me, her eyes blazing. "His
murderer was never found. It must be his soul which has not found rest."
I am not superstitious, and supected that the regime was trying to strain
my nerves as they had my father's in Rawalpindi Jail. But as a precaution, I
began to pray for the lost souls of the phansi ghat. After some months the voices
stopped. I still don't know what caused them.
I resumed the prayer ritual I had learned from the matron at Sukkur,
breathing the sura of the Quran over the bucket of water and sprinkling a little in
the corners of my cell. The cell was an odd shape and didn't have four square
corners and I was afraid the ritual wouldn't work. Would I at least be able to
attend Sanam's wedding? I had heard nothing about my application. "Qul Huwwa
Allahu Ahad, Say He Is One God," I prayed. After the second Wednesday and
before the third, the Pathan matron came to my cell early in the morning. "I heard
the voices near my cot," she told me. "They said, 'She's going today.' " This old
woman is mad, I thought to myself. Two hours later the jail authorities came.
"You are leaving immediately," they told me. "You have permission to go to your
sister's wedding."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

176

70 Clifton, the brass plaques still gleaming next to the gate. Sir Shah
Nawaz Khan Bhutto. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Bar-at-Law. The tensions of the last six
months eased a little as the police convoy delivering me drew up in front of the
gate. I had been convinced that I would never see this house again, that 70
Clifton would be confiscated by the regime or that I would be quietly put to death
at Sukkur without ever being home again. But here I was, alive. And here was my
home, the compound walls draped with strings of lights to celebrate my sister's
wedding. We had both survived.
I felt a new surge of life when the familiar gates swung open. As the
chowkidar saluted me and the convoy moved into the courtyard, I felt that God
had sent me a second life. With His help, I had not been defeated by the enemy.
A new sense of strength and resolve swept through me. In that instant, I was
reborn.
Drums. Dancing. Garlands of jasmine and roses. The entire household
staff was gathered on the front porch, beating on the dholak and dancing folk
dances with their arms undulating in time with the beat. Chowkidars. Bearers.
Secretaries. I saw Dost Mohammed, our major-domo, who had run faster than
the prison guards to reach my father in jail; Urs, my father's valet, who had been
pistol-whipped and beaten by the army during the raid to arrest my father;
Basheer and Ibrahim, who had been with my mother and me at Sihala when my
father was hanged; Nazar Mohammed from Larkana, who had received my
father's body, and buried him.
Their faces were wreathed now in smiles as they danced and sang. What
a wonderful wedding atmosphere, I thought, as I got out of the car. They rushed
toward me to drape the garlands around my neck. "Save them for the wedding
guests," I said as the garlands mounted to cover my ears. "No, no, we got the
flowers for you," they said. "We are so happy to have you home."
Home. I couldn't believe it. Ululations vibrated in the air as my relatives
streamed out the carved wooden front door. My mother's sisters were there.
Auntie Bejhat, who'd come from London, cousin Zeenat from Los Angeles, my
cousin Fakhri, who had been detained with me after my father's death sentence.
My father's sister Auntie Manna greeted me, as did his three half-sisters from
Hyderabad, who had unsuccessfully petitioned Zia to spare my father's life. Other
relatives had traveled from India, from America, from England, from Iran, from
France, filling every bed in our house as well as my brothers' separate
apartments, empty for the last four years. Laila! Nashilli! We hugged each other
and laughed and cried. I had never expected to see them again, nor they me.
Left unspoken was the fear that I'd never come out of prison alive.
The luxury of a hot bath. Carpeting under my feet. Pure, cool water to
drink. The feast of my family. I didn't sleep for two days and two nights, not
wanting to squander a single moment of freedom. My mother went to bed early
and I stayed up until dawn talking to Sanam. Soon after Sanam went to bed, my
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

177

mother got up. I couldn't get enough of them or of my other close relatives.
In the time I had to myself, I devoured the back issues of Asia Week, Far
Eastern Economic Review, Time, and Newsweek. I also scrubbed the walls of
my bedroom. In the last raid, I quickly discovered, the regime had stolen many of
the letters my father had written to me while I was studying abroad, irreplaceable
photographs of my brothers, sister, and me, my jewelry including a favorite ring
given to me by my mother, and a gold kohl holder from my grandmother. But it
was the feeling of the violation of my bedroom which bothered me most. I
scrubbed and scrubbed, trying to erase their psychological fingerprints from my
walls. Be thankful that God left you this room and this house, I kept reminding
myself. Just a few months back you didn't know whether you would have that.
"They won't take you back to prison, will they?" said my cousin Abdul Hussain,
forgetting that he was in Pakistan and not in San Francisco. I did not allow myself
to share his hope, though it was hard not to.
Everything at 70 Clifton seemed so normal, so comfortingly traditional.
The staff were rushing in and out, setting up buffet tables in the patterned tent in
the garden, covering the ground with rugs, arranging upholstered armchairs to
seat the guests. Sunny was having her hand hennaed by the mehndi artist who
had come to the house to trace delicate and intricate patterns on the hands of the
women in the wedding household. The mehndi artist made beautiful scrolls and
arabesques on my sister's palm with a toothpick, then sealed the henna with
lemon juice and sugar.
Sanam's wedding was small by Pakistani standards, only five hundred
guests. And not every tradition could be followed. I hadn't been able to have new
silk shalwar khameez made for the mehndi ceremony or for the nikah, the
wedding ceremony, as had most of the other women thronging through the
house. But it didn't matter. I hadn't seen the clothes in my closet or worn anything
fancy for so long that my old pink silk shalwar khameez seemed like new to me.
"Mom is forcing me to wear makeup," Sunny said, rushing into my
bedroom. "And I have to wear a sari. I wish I could just get married in a pair of
blue jeans. Do something."
"You only get married once," I said. "And Mummy's suffered a lot. Make
her happy by listening to her."
The bride is fairer than the moon. Yes she is, yes she is. The sound of
singing, not silence, filled the house the first night I was home. The bride is fairer
than the moon. Our female relatives clapped along with Sanam's girlfriends,
practicing the traditional songs and dances for the mehndi ceremony. Not
wanting to waste a moment of my freedom and not knowing how long it would
last, I visited with relatives and friends instead. Our worlds had become so
different. But which world was real? Twice I caught myself referring to my jail cell
as "home."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

178

Sunny looked beautiful as she joined her husband-to-be, Nasser Hussein,
on a green cushion inlaid with mirrors for the mehndi ceremony. As theirs was
not an arranged marriage, there was little tension between them. But there were
traditions. Carefully Sunny kept her dupatta over her face so that her groom
wouldn't catch a glimpse of her before the wedding, though she raised it and
talked to me while I sat beside her.
"Nasser ji, Nasser ji, about-to-be brother-in-law. Seven conditions you
have to accept before Sanam can become your bride," Sunny's friends and
relatives sang in front of us. "The first condition is that Sanam will not make
food."
"I will get a cook," Nasser sang back.
"Sanam will not wash clothes," the bride's side sang.
"I will take them to the laundry," Nasser sang back, responding to each
condition until his side got a chance to return the teasing.
Relatives from both sides brought in platters heaped with henna and
decorated with lit candles and silver foil. One by one Nasser's relatives pressed a
pinch of henna into a betel-nut leaf laid on Sanam's palm, placed a fingerful of
sweet in her mouth, and waved money over her head to protect her from evil.
Led by my mother, we on the bride's side did the same to Nasser.
The festive air came to an abrupt end when one of the staff suddenly
came up to us. "The police are at the gate," he said, casting a terrible silence
over the entire room. I assumed the police had come for me, but our majordomo
returned to say that they wanted my mother. The guests sucked in their breath.
My mother would never survive another detention.
"Call them in, Dost Mohammed. I don't want the police breaking down the
gates while our guests are here," my mother said calmly. The police came in
looking quite uncomfortable. "What do you want with me?" my mother asked
them, her voice firm in spite of her illness. They sheepishly handed her a Martial
Law order. It wasn't for her arrest, thank God, but instead notified her that she
was externed from the Punjab. My mother didn't have any plans to visit the
Punjab, and Zia knew it. He just wanted to harass us and dampen and spoil any
happiness the Bhuttos might be having.
And the harassment continued. The next morning, the wedding musicians
my mother had engaged suddenly sent word that they weren't coming. They
couldn't get a permit for a microphone from the authorities, they told us, the use
of loudspeakers having been banned under Martial Law. We didn't know whether
the regime had interfered or if the musicians had just gotten cold feet.
The harassment extended to our wedding guests, whose license plates
were noted by the regime's intelligence agents stationed in vans across the street
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

179

from 70 Clifton. The regime had already tried to get the guest list. My mother's
secretary had told her in tears that the regime had threatened him with dire
consequences if he didn't hand it over to them.
The country, however, was to be kept in the dark about the wedding. The
Bhutto name was not allowed to appear in the newspapers unless the stories
were negative, though journalists in Pakistan had become used to getting around
restrictions. To announce Sunny's engagement they had noted that Nasser's
grandfather, like our own, had once been prime minister of Junagadh State.
"Grandchildren of Two Former Prime Ministers of Junagadh State to Marry," the
headlines had read. To announce Sanam's wedding and my temporary release
from Karachi Jail, the headlines read: "Sister Attends Sister's Wedding."
Inside the gates of 70 Clifton, we remained determined to carry off
Sanam's wedding as a personal, family affair. My sister had suffered enough,
dragged into the world of politics in which she had no interest just because her
name was Bhutto. She had graduated alone from Harvard two months after her
father had been assassinated. She had been admitted to Oxford, but, unable to
concentrate on her studies, had returned to Pakistan. But to what? To become a
prisoner of sorts herself, living alone at 70 Clifton, her mother and sister in and
out of jail, her brothers in exile. She had always chosen to keep her circle of
friends small, disliking the attention she got as a Bhutto and the constant
questions about her father. She socialized now with only a handful of people she
had known for years, including Nasser, who had gone to school with Shah
Nawaz and Mir.
"Don't marry Sanam. The regime will ruin you," his uncles had warned him
when he had asked them to propose for him. "That is my decision, not yours," he
told them. "I love this girl. Whatever the price is, I will pay it." And he had. The
regime had all sorts of ways of punishing those in disfavor, opening tax
investigations, withholding permits, cutting off water to farmlands. Nasser's
vulnerability was his successful telecommunications business in Pakistan, which
sold state-of-the-art equipment primarily to the administration. His bids for
contracts were soon ignored, causing his business to drop by over 75 percent.
He and Sanam now live in London, where Nasser virtually had to start all over.
Their wedding, however, was beautiful.
Holding a Holy Quran over her head, my mother and I escorted Sanam
down the staircase to the nikah stage in the front hall. The sari Sanam wore for
the ceremony was green, the color of happiness. "Do you accept Nasser
Hussein, son of Nasim Abdul Qadir, as your husband?" asked our cousin Ashik
Ah Bhutto. Sanam smiled at my mother and me and remained silent, knowing
Ashik Ali had to ask her the question three times in the presence of two other
witnesses to be sure of her consent. Again he asked. Again Sanam remained
silent. Islam wants to make sure that the woman understands and agrees freely
to the marriage. After the third repetition, Sanam finally consented and signed the
marriage contract. Ashik Ali went to bring the good news to the men gathered in
another room. The maulvi read Nasser the marriage prayers. And my sister
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

180

became the first Bhutto woman to marry a man of her own choosing.
Two of Nasser's close friends brought him onto the dais to join his bride.
The female cousins and close friends held a silk shawl over the couple's heads
like a canopy while a mirror was placed between them. I fought back tears as
Sanam and Nasser looked at each other in the mirror, the traditional moment
when the bride and groom see each other as partners for the first time.
The dais was wreathed in roses, marigolds, and jasmine, sending their
sweet perfume into the night. Sanam and Nasser sat on a blue velvet footstool
surrounded by dishes of candied almonds, eggs painted in gold, walnuts and
pistachios dipped in silver. Candles burned in silver candelabra beside the
couple so that their lives would be filled with light. The sound of ululating filled the
air. The celebration had begun.
My mother and I sat with Sunny and Nasser while the guests lined up to
offer their congratulations. Many of them had spent time in jail and some showed
it, looking thin and drawn. "How well you look," they said to me. I hoped they
meant it, wanting to appear as unbroken by the regime as my father had in his
appearance before the Supreme Court. "How nice to see you," I murmured over
and over automatically. For all that my head was high, I felt shaky underneath.
Would I have to go back to prison? I had heard nothing from the
authorities. In the crowd I saw my lawyer Mujib, who told me he had an
appointment with the home secretary of Sindh early the next morning. Since my
detention was due to expire in less than a week anyway, he told me he would
ask the authorities to let me stay at 70 Clifton for the remaining period.
After the guests departed I collected magazines and newspapers to try to
smuggle back into jail if the police came for me, along with Kleenex and insect
killer. I stayed up all night, talking with my cousins, with Samiya, and writing a
last-minute letter to Peter Galbraith, my old friend from Harvard and Oxford.
Peter was handling the South Asia portfolio for the U.S. Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, my mother told me, and had recently come to Pakistan to
review U.S. security interests. He had tried to visit me in Karachi Central Jail, she
said, but he had received no response to his request from the regime. Later he
told me what happened.
Peter Galbraith, August 1981:
I carried a letter with me to Pakistan from Senator Claiborne Pell, the
minority leader of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, requesting the
regime to permit me to visit Benazir. I made a big pitch to the Pakistani Foreign
Ministry as well as to the U.S. embassy, which at that time was quite hostile to
the Bhuttos.
The regime didn't even respond to Senator Pell's request, nor to mine.
Although the U.S. embassy tried to discourage contact with the Bhuttos, I went
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

181

around to 70 Clifton to see Begum Bhutto anyway. She was pale and looked very
tired. She was very concerned about Benazir's confinements in Sukkur and
Karachi jails over the previous five months.
Begum Bhutto invited me to join her, Sanam, and Fakhri at the Karachi
Boat Club. As we left 70 Clifton she told me to smile for the security men who
were taking pictures with a telephoto lens from a car across the street. I gave
them my best politician's wave.
Through lunch, I could not keep my mind off Pinkie's imprisonment. The
last time I had seen her was at Oxford in January of 1977. Pinkie had just been
elected president of the Oxford Union and was holding court before fawning
undergraduates in the president's office.
Since then, her life had taken such an unexpected, almost
incomprehensible direction. I kept thinking of her returning home only to see her
father overthrown, put on trial for his life, and then executed. And then for Pinkie
to spend so much time in prison, and under such terrible conditions. As I often
handled human rights cases I knew these things happened, but it was still hard to
comprehend that it was happening to a friend. As I left the Boat Club, I gave
Begum Bhutto a long, newsy letter for Benazir which I had written the night
before on a legal pad.
Back in the United States I prepared a report for the Foreign Relations
Committee on the prospective resumption of assistance to Pakistan. The report
argued that the assistance risked identifying the United States with an unpopular
military dictatorship and could lead to a repetition of the American experience in
Iran. I urged a forceful human rights policy as a signal that our assistance was
intended to benefit the country as well as the rulers. Privately, I briefed Senator
Pell and Committee head Senator Charles Percy on the treatment of the Bhutto
women. Both were eager to help. I wished Benazir knew she wasn't forgotten.
The sun was barely up in Karachi when I read and reread Peter's chatty
letter, cherishing the news of his wife, Anne, and the birth of their son. Old
memories of a simpler time were rekindled. I wrote him back.
10 September, 1981
Dear Peter,
Last night was Sunny's wedding. The whole house is sound asleep. It is
now 6:00 a.m. and a few hours of freedom remain to me. I wanted to quickly
write to tell you how happy your letter made me, to hear from you, to receive
news of our friends and to know how well you are doing in life. My prayers for
your success and for your brother Jamie's success will always be there.
So unsettling in a way to hear from Harvard, a voice from the past,
harkening back to an age of innocence. Did they teach us that life could
be full of such terrible dangers and tragedies? Were the words we read or
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

182

did not read, meanings I, at least, can now say I failed to grasp. Freedom
and liberty, the essays we wrote on them, papers for our tutors, for
grades, but did we know the value of those words which we bandied
about, of how precious they are, as precious as the air we breathe, the
water we drink. But then, the harsh realities seemed so remote in the
snows of Vermont and the yards of Harvard. . . .
Later in the morning I went up to my mother's bedroom with tea. "Stay with
me," my mother said. "Maybe we'll hear the good news from Mujib together."
Shortly afterward, my lawyer arrived. The home secretary had turned down his
request, he told me. Until I signed a promise not to violate the ban on politics,
he'd been told, I would stay in jail.
The police came at 10 A.M. My relatives and the staff crowded into the
courtyard to send me off, running after the car as it moved down Clifton past the
Iranian embassy, past Clifton Gardens, where children gathered to fly kites, past
the Soviet embassy, the Libyan embassy, the Italian embassy. As always, I was
whizzed at full speed through half-empty back streets to the jail.
The familiar sound of the jailer's keys opening padlock after padlock
greeted me at Karachi Central. I walked briskly through the small iron door cut in
the high brick wall, kept my back straight as I moved down the windowless
muddy corridor toward my ward. I didn't want anyone to think my two days of
freedom had softened me. I also hoped they wouldn't search me. Before leaving
70 Clifton, I had Stuffed the magazines and newspapers into my bag.
The electricity was off as usual when I made it safely to my cell.
Automatically, I registered a complaint. For the next two days I was sick, throwing
up bile and brown gastric juice. Whether it was psychological or something I had
eaten, I don't know, but I was very ill.
On the third day, September 13th, I luckily felt stronger. A jailer came with
a depressing, but not unexpected, order from the district Martial Law
administrator. My detention at Karachi Central Jail was extended for another
three months.
I started reading my Wednesday prayer every day instead of once a week.
The prayer had always worked for me before. Perhaps by reading it daily, the
doors of my cell would open permanently after the second Wednesday and
before the third. My target date for the prayer to work now was September 30th,
the third Wednesday. Failing that, the next target date was Margaret Thatcher's
visit to Pakistan at the beginning of October.
Zia had to free me someday and I was always looking for dates on which
to pin my hopes for release. I knew Margaret Thatcher, having met her first with
my father in Rawalpindi at the prime minister's house when she was the
opposition leader. I had met her again in London over tea in her offices in the
House of Commons when I was the president of the Oxford Union. If the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

183

Thatcher visit passed without my being freed, perhaps I'd be let out on Eid, which
this year fell on October 9th. The regime always released some prisoners at the
end of Ramazan as a mark of respect to the religious occasion.
I was not to be released on any of those dates. On the 25th of September,
1981, Chaudhry Zahur Elahi, one of the ministers in Zia's military cabinet who
had accepted Zia's pen as a gift after Zia signed my father's death warrant and
who had passed out sweets after my father was hanged, was ambushed in
Lahore and shot dead. Riding in the same car and wounded in the attack was
Maulvi Mushtaq Hussein, the former chief justice of the Lahore High Court who
had sentenced my father to death. Also in the car was M. A. Rehman, the special
public prosecutor in my father's murder case, who escaped injury.
I felt there was divine retribution when I read the headlines about Elahi's
assassination in the paper. "Now his wife, his daughter, his family will know what
it is like to feel grief," I noted in my diary. "I do not rejoice, for a Muslim does not
rejoice over death. Life and death are in God's hands. But there is consolation in
knowing that the bad guys don't get away scot-free."
My gratification was short-lived. The regime resurrected Al-Zulfikar as the
source for this latest violence, and the arrests began. Mir didn't help when, the
day after the assassination, he took credit for it in a BBC interview in the name of
Al-Zulfikar. A debate about the attack might have exposed the immoral role Elahi
had played in the death of my father; instead all the attention was focused on
routing out the supposed members of Al-Zulfikar.
Terrorists! Murderers! Political assassins! the headlines screamed. Once
again the regime used Al-Zulfikar to suppress political opposition, one young
leader of the PPP after another arrested, warrants issued for hundreds of others.
Four young men were taken to Haripur Jail, where they were badly tortured. The
father of one of them, I learned later, Ahmed Ali Soomro, had come to see a
member of the PPP in a terrible state. He had paid an enormous amount of
money to the police just to glimpse his son from a distance so he'd know whether
he was alive or dead. According to press reports, there were 103 young men in
Haripur Jail alone, 200 in another town nearby.
Women were being rounded up again, including Nasira Rana Shaukat,
who was taken back to the Lahore Fort. Once more the wife of the PPP's general
secretary was given electric shocks and interrogated for twenty-three days
without sleep. "Implicate your husband in the assassination," she was ordered.
"Implicate Benazir. Implicate Begum Bhutto." What that brave woman endured is
beyond comprehension. She was held for the next seven months in a cell with no
toilet facilities, just a tray which was changed twice a week. She spent the winter
lying on the cement floor with no sweater, no bedding, no blankets, and nearly
died of pneumonia. When she was finally transferred to house arrest, she could
neither walk nor speak.
In the midst of this new wave of brutality, Margaret Thatcher arrived for
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

184

her visit. Two years before, a BBC report carried in the press pointed out, it
would have been unthinkable that a Western head of government would visit
Pakistan, Zia having dismissed all world pleas to spare the life of the elected
prime minister. But the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan had overridden all of the
West's prior reservations about Zia. Instead, the BBC reported, Britain was now
making every effort to build Zia's image. It was heartening to hear that the world
press, at least, realized that Zia was still the deplorable murderer that he always
was, and was continuing in office only with the patronage of outside powers. Still,
it was a shock to read in the newspaper that after a tour of the Afghan refugee
camps, Margaret Thatcher presented Zia with a certificate declaring him "the last
bastion of the free world."
I was increasingly frustrated as well to read about the twisting of the
political situation in Pakistan by the Reagan administration in its congressional
campaign to restore U.S. aid. "Bhutto's PPP might be opposed to it [the aid], but
not the great mass of the common people who realized that Pakistan was having
to face a great threat to its security with antiquated weapons," ambassadordesignate to Pakistan Ronald Spiers had reportedly testified before the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee in September. He was completely wrong. First, the
PPP was the only voice of the "great mass of the common people." And second,
we were not opposed to foreign aid per se, but to aid designed to bolster General
Zia and perpetuate his military occupation of Pakistan. Yet the arguments remain
reversed. The Republican administration's point man for the aid package. Under
Secretary of State James Buckley, even testified that elections were not "in the
security interest of Pakistan," as if we, the democratic party, were the enemy,
and not the dictator!
I didn't know then that behind the headlines certain American politicians
were quietly challenging Mr. Buckley's conclusions. Peter Galbraith had returned
to Washington determined to raise the issue of human rights abuses in Pakistan
and to win my release. Working with Senator Pell, Peter developed a very
straightforward strategy. Each time Pakistan was raised in the U.S. Senate, the
issue of human rights and my detention would also be raised. Neither the
American administration nor the Zia dictatorship would be allowed to forget about
the political prisoners in Pakistan. Eventually, they hoped enough pressure could
be brought to bear so that the regime would decide it was easier to release me
than to continually confront the issue of my and others' unfair detentions.
I would read later how Senator Pell, an opponent of resumed assistance
to Pakistan, had implemented the strategy. "The F-16 is the most visible symbol
of American support for the Zia regime," India Today quoted Senator Pell as
saying to Under Secretary of State Buckley. "Amnesty International believes that
human rights violations in Pakistan amount to a consistent pattern ... do you feel
they are correct?" When Mr. Buckley tried to answer in vague terms Senator Pell
apparently got very specific. "It appears as if President Zia is conducting a
vendetta against the widow and daughter of executed—murdered—former Prime
Minister Bhutto," the senator charged. "I am wondering if the Administration has
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

185

made any representation to the Government of Pakistan about the confinement
and maltreatment of the Bhutto family." In reply, Under Secretary Buckley
promised efforts through "private diplomacy," a code word for doing nothing at
all. But at least Senator Pell had made his point.
The American Congress's traditional deference to the request of a new
administration as well as concerns about Afghanistan outweighed objections
from Senator Pell and others about Zia's human rights record and about
Pakistan's nuclear program. Congress approved the proposed aid package, but
at least Senator Pell was able to persuade his colleagues to go along with an
amendment stating that "in authorizing assistance to Pakistan, it is the intent of
Congress to promote the expeditious restoration of full civil liberties and
representative government in Pakistan." While the Pell amendment had little
practical effect, it was a useful shot over the bow of the Zia dictatorship.
At Karachi Central Jail, Eid came and went without my release. The
Pathan matron told me that political prisoners were among those freed for the
holiday, which made me very happy for them and their families. Many among the
jail staff showed me their own warmth and respect for Eid. The wife of one jailer
requested one of my khameez so she could have Eid clothes made for me, while
another jailer sent me a message that he would remain at the front desk and
pressure the authorities until the electricity was restored to my cell block. "I hope
we remember such people in the good times," I noted in my diary.
For every political prisoner freed for Eid, however, ten were being
arrested. The student leader Lala Assad, I read in the paper, was now the
subject of an intensive manhunt. Lala Assad was a loyal supporter of the party,
and I prayed that he would elude the police. Toward the end of my period of
freedom in 1981, when I had traveled to Khairpur to give certificates to students
who had been jailed for protesting Martial Law, I had used the birthday
celebration of Lala Assad's son Zulfikar, who was named after my father, as a
cover. Lala Assad himself had spent two years in prison for his support of my
father. His own father, a former minister of West Pakistan who had fought with
Mohammed Ali Jinnah for the independent state of Pakistan, had asked to speak
with me during my visit. Ill and bedridden, the old man had begged me to urge
his son to give up politics.
"I don't have long to live," Lala Assad's father said to me. "I never
interfered with my son's political activities while Mr. Bhutto was in jail. But now
that the prime minister is dead, I need my son to look after me, to look after his
wife and child. When I am gone, he will be free to work for you and your party.
But in my dying days, I need my son." I promised him that I would speak to Lala
Assad, which I did. I had no idea what happened after I left, for I was arrested a
month later and taken to Sukkur. Now a year later Lala Assad was being sought
as a leader of Al-Zulfikar. I had no idea whether the charge was true.
Terrorism. Violence. Was there to be no end to the cycle? Three
presidents had been assassinated in the last few months alone. President Zia urDaughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

186

Rahman in Bangladesh, President Rajai in Iran, and most recently Anwar elSadat in Egypt on October 6th. I felt sad for President Sadat, for his family, for
his violent end. As a child, I had been an avid supporter of his predecessor,
Gamal Abdel Nasser, greatly admiring his fight against British colonialism and
American imperialism during the Suez War. Nasser had seemed a colossus to
me, promising a new world of equality to be built from the ashes and rubble of
yesterday's obsolete kings and monarchs. I had spent hours in my father's library
at 70 Clifton reading every book about Nasser I could, including his own, The
Philosophy of the Revolution.
I had not been fond of Sadat, who had turned against his mentor and
reversed his policies when he assumed the presidency of Egypt in 1970. But
reading of Sadat's death in my cell, I found myself unexpectedly moved. Though
Papa had been sharply critical of the separate peace Sadat had made with
Israel, Sadat had appealed for my father's life. The Egyptian president had also
given refuge to the Shah of Iran and his family, despite the unpopularity of the
measure. And when the shah died of cancer, Sadat had ordered a full-scale
funeral for him, showing a generosity of spirit rare in the world of realpolitik. He
had not let political differences and disputes stand in the way of what he thought
was right. Now he, too, was dead.
A depression settled over me. Night after night as I sat over my
embroidery I got splitting headaches. On the night of November 21st —my
brother Shah's birthday—I suddenly felt my throat constrict and tears rush to my
eyes. I went to lie down but could not control the tears which flowed freely.
Where were my brothers? How were they? Both Mir and Shah had gotten
married just after Eid. They had married Afghani sisters in Kabul named Fauzia
and Rehana, the daughters of a former government servant. That was all we
knew about them. I was very glad that my brothers had found a source of love,
warmth, and emotional comfort in these difficult times. Why then was I so
depressed?
I sank into a troubled sleep. Mir was secretly back in Pakistan, I dreamed
in a recurrent dream. He had walked the mountains, come through the Afghan
mountain passes, forded the Indus, and was hiding in a closet in 70 Clifton. The
army raided the house. Just as they opened the closet and saw him, I woke up.
I had the wrong victim. The next morning, I read that Lala Assad had been
shot dead by the police. The pain in my head intensified. Lala Assad had been
killed in a gun battle with the police in Karachi's Federal B area, the newspaper
reported, after he shot and killed a policeman. I didn't learn the truth for months.
Lala Assad, in fact, had been unarmed at the time of the shooting. The
policeman had been shot by another policeman in the cross fire. When Lala
Assad tried to escape the ambush, he had been gunned down in cold blood.
Lala Assad dead. Now his blood, too, was on General Zia's uniform. What
must Lala Assad's father be feeling? Instead of having his son to care for him in
his last days, he was receiving his son's body. When would it end?
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

187

"A country-wide hunt for Al-Zulfikar terrorists has continued and police
have arrested several hundred people," the paper reported on November 26th.
The police were staking out houses, youth hostels, the airports all over the
country. Checkpoints were set up on all routes leading out of Karachi, be it by
land, sea, or air. Special binoculars, the papers reported, were being used by the
police to peer through the tinted glass of car windows. Makeup artists had been
contacted by the police to prevent the "absconders" from adopting disguises.
My anxiety deepened. I was wracked by remorse over Lala Assad's death.
I prayed for him to forgive me for the times I had spoken sharply to him. I tortured
myself for keeping pictures of him and other student leaders at 70 Clifton,
pictures the police had taken in the last raid. Had they used the photographs to
identify him?
I looked at the weblike lines on the back of my hands, the lines around my
eyes, across my cheeks, on my forehead. I thought they were a reaction to the
hot dry weather and winds at Sukkur. But they appeared to be permanent. I was
aging much too fast.
On December 11th, the day my detention order ended, I prepared myself
to receive a new one. I knew I wouldn't be released after the crackdown. My food
arrived an hour early—with the expected detention order. But Senator Pell's
message had apparently found its way into Pakistan. Two weeks later, the
deputy superintendent came to see me unexpectedly in the late afternoon. "Pack
your belongings," he told me abruptly. "You are being taken to Larkana tomorrow
morning at five-forty-five under police escort."
The day matron wept at our parting. The Pathan matron wept too, and
asked my forgiveness if her stupidity had aggravated me. I wept and wept
myself. Though I had dreamed and fantasized of being transferred to sub-jail at
home, I suddenly dreaded leaving the secret network that had been established
at Karachi Central Jail. I had cherished the occasional copies of the International
Herald Tribune, Time, or Newsweek the sympathetic jailers allowed to be sent to
me. In Karachi I was also near my mother and my sister. Now I would be cut off
from them in the rural isolation of Al-Murtaza.
The police came for me soon after dawn on December 27, 1981. I took
one last look at my grotty, dank cell. How could I possibly be sad at leaving? But
I was, just as I had been when I'd left the familiarity of Sukkur. The years of
detention were getting to me. I had come to dread the unknown.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

188

10
TWO MORE YEARS
ALO E I SUB-JAIL

Familiarity. Comfort. Home. Aside from the fact that the paramilitary
Frontier Forces were once more posted inside the compound walls, and a prison
staff came daily to Al-Murtaza to oversee my detention, I reveled in my apparent
good fortune. Some members of the household staff would be permitted to enter
Al-Murtaza during the day, the Martial Law authorities told me. I could use the
telephone and, best of all, receive three visitors a fortnight. After almost ten
months of solitary confinement, these privileges sounded tantamount to a stay in
a five-star hotel. I celebrated my first night home by taking a long, hot bath and
manicuring my nails.
But I had celebrated too soon. My phone calls were restricted to
conversations with my relatives and any political conversations were disallowed.
The phone rarely worked. Often my calls were disconnected or the line simply
went dead. I found out why later. All the phone lines were run through a military
communications outpost set up outside the walls.
In the year that the regime kept me locked up at Al-Murtaza, the promise
of three visitors a fortnight soon became a myth as well. Only my mother,
Sanam, and my Auntie Manna were on my allowed list. Each lived in Karachi,
over an hour away by air, a journey made more difficult by the infrequent and
inconveniently timed flights to Interior Sindh. Sanam, who now had a house and
a husband to look after, came only once or twice. My mother, who was in poor
health, was able to visit only infrequently. I had political acquaintances in Larkana
who could have visited me easily, but the jail authorities did not allow
substitutions. Save for brief exchanges with the household staff, I was essentially
back in solitary confinement. When I did have a visitor, more often than not a jail
official, my jaws ached afterward from the unaccustomed exercise. I probably
should have talked to myself in the endless silence if nothing more than to hear a
human voice, but I didn't think of it.
New detention orders, however, came regularly every three months. I
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

189

knew the words now, by heart. "Whereas the Deputy Martial Law Administrator is
of the opinion that for the purpose of preventing Miss Benazir Bhutto from acting
in a manner prejudicial to the purpose for which Martial Law has been
proclaimed, or to the security of Pakistan, the public safety or interest, or the
efficient conduct of Martial Law, it is necessary to detain the said Miss Benazir
Bhutto. . . ."
Time weighed more heavily than ever. There were no afternoon papers to
read, no International Herald Tribune. There was little on television aside from
Arabic-language study programs, Zia's news in Sindhi, Urdu, and English,
brainwashing documentaries about the regime's political activities, and a few
half-hour plays. I succumbed to periods of self-pity followed by attacks of
remorse. You shouldn't be ungrateful to God, I chided myself. You have your
home. You have food and clothing. Think of all those less fortunate. My emotions
swung back and forth like a pendulum.
I taught myself cooking to pass the time, practicing recipes from my
mother's old cookbooks left in the kitchen. The ovens didn't work and the kitchen
utensils were limited, not even an eggbeater among them. Every dish I produced
then—curries, rice, dahl—became a mini-triumph of sorts. Like the ladyfingers
and chilis my mother had managed to grow at Al-Murtaza during our detention
three years before, the food I was making now assumed an unusual relevance. I
could look at a bowl of rice I'd made and see in it proof that I existed. I had
caused it to become edible. Coquo, ergo sum. I cook, therefore I am.
I worried constantly about my mother. It had been four months since she
visited me in Karachi Central Jail and told me that her doctor suspected she had
lung cancer. If indeed she did have cancer, she was in a race against time. Early
detection and treatment of lung cancer can arrest it. Left untreated, lung cancer
can kill quickly. To build up her strength for further diagnostic tests, my mother
had been put on a special diet by her doctor. The last series of tests had been
more conclusive. The shadow on her left lung, the doctors determined, was most
probably malignant.
She was in need of a CAT scan and treatment, her doctors reported to the
regime, which was unavailable in Pakistan. Yet my mother's request for the
restoration of her passport so she could travel abroad for medical attention was
being ignored. It was rumored that the Interior Ministry could do nothing because
Zia had taken my mother's file with him on a trip to Beijing.
One month passed without the regime granting permission for my mother
to leave Pakistan. Then another. Losing hope, my mother's doctor in Karachi
began chemotherapy. My frustration when my mother first told me the news over
the phone deepened to bitterness after her subsequent calls. Her hair was
thinning and she was losing weight, she confessed, regretting that she could not
come visit. As a daughter, I felt inadequate that I could not be with her or help
her.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

190

In spite of the censored press, the news of her ordeal was spreading
through the country. "The people haven't forgotten Mummy," Sanam tried to
reassure me over the phone. "We're getting constant calls inquiring about her,
and so is Fakhri. Apparently her health is a major topic of conversation at
diplomatic receptions and coffee parties, at bus stops and cinemas."
"Zia will have to let her go," I said hopefully, trying to convince myself. But
even when the pressure on Zia began to tell, he didn't let her go. Instead, three
months after my mother's diagnosis of probable cancer, he convened a Federal
Medical Board to determine whether or not she was sick enough to warrant
medical treatment abroad.
A Federal Medical Board. Another petty discrimination. Not since the time
of Ayub Khan, when foreign travel was restricted, had citizens of Pakistan
needed the authorization of a medical board to obtain a passport. Under my
father, the right to a passport had become a fundamental right for every
Pakistani, and with it the right to travel freely. It was quite common for members
of Zia's regime to travel abroad at government cost for minor ailments easily
treatable in Pakistan. But for his political opponents, Zia had reinstituted the
medical board. Now he was using it to delay my mother's departure for treatment.
When the board finally did convene, Zia stacked it. Just as the Supreme
Court's decision upholding my father's death sentence had been affected by
diminishing the size of the judicial bench, seven ; doctors were now assigned to
the medical board instead of the usual three to make sure Zia got the decision he
wanted. All seven were employees of the regime. The head of the board was a
serving major general.
"Begum Sahiba seems well enough to me," this general said irresponsibly
shortly after the board's first meeting. Others in the stacked board demanded that
my mother undergo yet another fourteen lung X rays and a blood test, a process
so exhausting that she developed a fever, began coughing blood, and fainted
immediately after its conclusion. Although the tests showed that the shadow in
her lung had grown larger and that her hemoglobin count had dropped, the head
of the board suggested that she have another bronchoscopy, which was not only
unnecessary but could aggravate any malignancy. My mother's physician in
Karachi, Dr. Saeed, who was himself a member of the board, was outraged and
refused to endorse the board's decision. The anesthesiologist at the hospital
backed him up, insisting that my mother could not withstand the general
anesthesia necessary to insert the diagnostic tube into her lung.
I prayed for my mother at Al-Murtaza. There was nothing else I could do.
But in the rest of the country, the fear that Zia might actually let my mother die
began to move people to action. "We could not save Mr. Bhutto," people began
to whisper among themselves. "We must not stand by while Begum Bhutto
wastes away." Indignation at my mother's callous treatment at the hands of the
regime cut across traditional lines of PPP support to include military families and
those high in Zia's bureaucracy.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

191

"Guess what! The wife and sisters of the Martial Law administrator of
Sindh took part in a ladies' demonstration to save Auntie's life," Fakhri excitedly
phoned me at Al-Murtaza.
"Did the police arrest them?" I almost shrieked, not believing what I was
hearing. After General Zia, the four provincial Martial Law administrators were
the most powerful men in the country.
"They didn't dare. When they came, all the demonstrators ran into the
Martial Law administrator's house and closed the gates," Fakhri said.
My mother's ordeal, I would find out later, was also sparking protest
abroad. In England, a group of my old friends from Oxford met with Dr. Niazi,
Amina Piracha, and several human rights activists to mount a campaign called
"Save the Bhutto Ladies." The group concentrated first on freeing my mother,
lobbying the members of Parliament with the assistance of Lord Avebury, a
member of the House of Lords. Two MPs, Joan Lestor and Jonathan Aitken,
quickly responded, sponsoring an Early Day Motion in the House of Commons:
"Medical Treatment for Begum Bhutto: That this House urges the
Government of Pakistan to allow Begum Bhutto to travel abroad for medical
treatment for the cancer from which she suffers." On November 4th, Lord
Avebury held a press conference in the House of Lords, during which a British
doctor outlined the gravity of my mother's condition.
Members of the United States government were also entering their
entreaties for my mother's life. "Dear Mr. Ambassador," Senator John Glenn, a
member of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, wrote Ejaz Azim, the
Pakistani ambassador to Washington, on November 8th. "More than two months
ago Mrs. Nusrat Bhutto, widow of the late Prime Minister, requested permission
to go abroad to seek treatment for a probable malignancy on the lung. ... On
humanitarian grounds I would urge your government to act expeditiously in
approving Mrs. Bhutto's request. Prompt approval would be seen here as a
compassionate act and would help strengthen the relationship between our two
countries."
Zia, however, had grown used to ignoring pleas for compassion from
Western governments. Away on a visit to Southeast Asia, he was so confident
that the board was going to go his way that he beat them to their decision. "There
is nothing wrong with Begum Bhutto," the press quoted him from Kuala Lumpur
on November 11th, the day the board had scheduled its final meeting. "If she
wants to go abroad on a holiday to do some sightseeing, then she can apply for
that and I'll think about it."
But General Zia had not counted on my mother's physician. Dr. Saeed. "I
will not sign your report," Dr. Saeed told the major general heading the medical
board when it convened later that day. "My conscience as a doctor will simply not
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

192

allow me to put my patient's life in jeopardy."
"Neither will mine," suddenly announced another of the doctors on the
board, breaking the unspoken rule that all members of a federal board follow the
lead of their commander.
"Nor mine," added another, then another. The major general watched in
shock as the defiance of the doctors snowballed, one after another signing a
statement produced by Dr. Saeed which called for my mother's immediate
release from Pakistan. "You must sign too," Dr. Saeed told him with delight.
"When all the officers agree, how can the general refuse?" The major general's
shock no doubt deepened when shortly after he did indeed place his signature on
the document, Zia summarily removed him from both his civil and military posts.
The regime gave my mother permission to go abroad the day after the
board's surprise announcement. I was overjoyed when I read the news in the
morning paper and immediately applied to the authorities for permission to see
her before she left. After almost a year of incarceration at Al-Murtaza, I was
suddenly told to pack my things. A convoy of twelve police cars, trucks, and
jeeps took me to Moenjo-daro Airport. There, the police confiscated the cameras
of the photographers recording the first sight the public had had of me in eleven
months. Policemen armed with Sten guns followed me to the plane. When I
arrived in Karachi, a helicopter flew over the car as I was driven in another
convoy to 70 Clifton. All this for a daughter to say goodbye to her mother.
My mother, lying pale and weak on her bed. My mother, who had aged
well beyond her years. Once again, I was torn with personal conflict. More than
anything I wanted her to get the medical treatment abroad she so urgently
needed. Yet I dreaded being left alone in the emptiness of detention. I fought the
feelings of loneliness that lay ahead in sub-jail as Fakhri rushed in and out of the
bedroom with last-minute messages from the secretary general of the MRD and
other party people. "What will happen if Begum Bhutto leaves?" the messages
ran. But my mother had no choice.
"It is with a heavy heart, and under medical duress, that I take leave of our
Land and our People for a temporary period," my mother wrote in her farewell
statement. "My thoughts will constantly be with you, with the struggling masses,
with the hungry and the oppressed, with the exploited and the discriminated, with
all those who have a vision for a progressive and prosperous Pakistan. . . ."
The regime kept announcing false dates in the newspapers for my
mother's departure, hoping to discourage the people from gathering. Wise to the
deviousness of the regime, a steady stream of PPP supporters constantly drove
by 70 Clifton, searching for signs of her impending departure. We could hear
their shouts from inside the walls. "Jiye, Bhutto," they called out. "Begum Bhutto,
Zindabad! Long live Begum Bhutto!"
On the night of November 20, 1982, I kissed my mother goodbye and
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

193

gave her lockets filled with soil from my father's grave to give to my brothers and
for my newly born nieces, pendants engraved with the Quranic verse for safety.
We both wept, not knowing what lay ahead for either one of us. "Take care of
yourself," she said to me. Together we walked out the carved wooden front door
of 70 Clifton, where thirteen years before my mother had passed the Holy Quran
over my head as I left for Harvard. And she was gone into the masses of people
waiting outside the gates.
Samiya Waheed:
Dost Mohammed drove Begum Bhutto to the airport with Sanam
and Fakhri in the back seat. The crowds were enormous as we pulled
away from 70 Clifton. Defying the regime which had tried to keep her
departure secret., Begum Bhutto turned the light on in the car so the
people could see her. Mrs. Niazi, Amina, my sister Salma, and I followed
in the car behind. At every intersection more cars joined us, until we
formed a giant cavalcade of well-wishers. When we reached the top of the
airport bridge, I looked back. The cars escorting Begum Bhutto to the
airport had taken over seven lanes of the highway. Cars going in the
opposite direction were forced into one lane.
The crowds waiting for her at the airport were even bigger. As we
pulled up to the terminal, they overran our cars. I saw one man's bare feet
through the windshield as he climbed onto our roof. "God go with you," he
called to Begum Bhutto as party members struggled to get her into a
wheelchair and inside the terminal. They finally had to pass her wheelchair
over the heads of the crowd. The airline crew for the Air France flight was
finding it equally difficult to get through. They had to throw their flight bags
to each other. At the end of their hundred-yard struggle, their uniforms
were rumpled, their hats knocked off, and the flight attendants' hair
unpinned. It was the most tumultuous farewell Pakistan had ever
witnessed. The people didn't know if they were going to see the widow of
their prime minister and the beloved leader of the PPP again.
My mother underwent a CAT scan and further treatment in West
Germany. She responded well, and luckily, the cancer was arrested. Meanwhile I
remained under guard at 70 Clifton. Eleven jail personnel were posted inside the
house. Outside, members of the Frontier Force were stationed every two feet
around the house. Intelligence agents oversaw everything from their positions
across from the front and back gates. I was to remain behind this hostile
barricade at 70 Clifton for fourteen more months.
With great interest I read Jacobo Timerman's Prisoner Without a name,
Cell Without a Number, the newspaper publisher's chronicle of his two and a half
years as a political prisoner in Argentina. "It was the mirror of our souls, pain
filled eyes reflected in pain filled eyes," I noted in my diary. "When he spoke of
the torture in the electric chair, the words on the page leapt out at me. The body
was torn apart, Timerman wrote, and yet, miraculously, there was no mark or
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

194

scar on the flesh. The political prisoners were dumped after the chair treatment to
recuperate, then returned to be tortured again. Was he speaking of Argentina or
was he speaking of the military regime's interrogation cells in Pakistan?"
Presidential Order No. 4, issued March 24, 1982: Trials by special military
court could now be held in camera. No one needed to be informed when a trial
was taking place, who the accused were, what the charges were against them, or
the resulting sentence. To make sure there were no leaks, it became a crime for
the lawyers or anyone in any way connected with the case to disclose any
information about it to the public.
Martial Law Regulation No. 54, issued September 23, 1982, and
retroactive to the day of Zia's coup, July 5, 1977: The death penalty was now
authorized for anyone committing an offense "liable to cause insecurity, fear, or
despondency among the public." The death penalty was also prescribed for
anyone who had knowledge of such an offense and failed to inform the Martial
Law authorities. Further, the accused was now assumed to be guilty until proved
innocent. "The military court., . . may, unless the contrary is proved, presume the
accused has committed the offense charged," the ordinance stated.
In October, two thousand lawyers met in Karachi to demand the
restoration of civil liberties. The organizers of the conference were arrested and
sentenced to one year's rigorous imprisonment. Two weeks later, Mr. Hafiz
Lakho, a former lawyer for my father, was arrested, along with the Karachi Bar
Association's secretary.
In December I read in the papers that Zia was in Washington to meet with
President Reagan and the members of Congress. In the month of December
alone, there were more than twenty executions of prisoners in Pakistan. Did the
members of Congress know about the human rights abuses in Pakistan? Did
they care?
I would not find out the answer for another three years. As much as Zia
had expected his visit to Washington to be a great celebration of his newfound
respectability in the West, he had instead run into a barrage of criticism during a
meeting with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. "Those who were present
recall that the General was cool and confident—until [Senator] Pell handed him a
letter expressing the committee's concern about a number of Pakistani political
prisoners," Jack Anderson wrote in the Washington Post. "Heading the list was
Benazir Bhutto."
Zia reportedly blew up when Senator Pell pressed him about my
detentions. "I can tell you this, Senator," he snapped, claiming that I had broken
the "law," "she lives in a better house than any senator." Zia then went on to
claim that I was allowed visits from relatives and friends and "even had use of a
telephone."
Upon hearing Zia's claims, Peter Galbraith put them to the test and called
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

195

70 Clifton. A male voice answered and he asked to speak to me.
"You cannot speak to her. She is in jail," the man replied.
"I am calling from the U.S. Senate," Peter ventured. "Your president was
just here and told us that Miss Bhutto could use the telephone."
"You cannot speak to her. It is forbidden," the man said firmly and
slammed down the phone.
I spent the birthday of the founder of Pakistan in detention at 70 Clifton. I
was alone on New Year's Day and my father's birthday. As 1983 began, I
realized there had been only one New Year's Day that I had been free since
1977. I began to grind my teeth at night. In the morning I often woke up to find
my knuckles swollen and my fingers so tightly clenched that I couldn't open them.
"I am truly grateful to God for all that He has blessed me with," I wrote in
my journal. "My name, my honor, my reputation, my life, my father, mother,
brothers, sister, education, ability to talk, having both my hands and legs,
eyesight, hearing, no disfiguring scars. . . ." On and on my list of blessings went
to eradicate my feelings of self-pity. Other political prisoners were far worse off
than I was in the cold of their winter cells.
A member of the household staff came to the house one day with a new
woolen scarf. There were many being sold cheaply on the black market by the
Afghan refugees, he told me. I smuggled out a message to a party worker to
have scarves made with the red, green, and black colors of the PPP at the ends.
We sent thousands to the prisoners in jail all over Sindh, along with socks and
sweaters.
My ear began to hurt again, as did my teeth, my gums, my joints. "There's
nothing the matter with your ear," the regime's ear doctor at the naval hospital
told me. Their dentist was equally inept, asking me which tooth I wanted him to
X-ray. "I don't know specifically which tooth," I told him. "You're the dentist, not
me. It's in this general area." "We can't waste X rays," he said.
Stories about my health began to appear in the British press, to which the
minister of information at the Pakistani embassy responded. "Whenever she
complained of any ailment she was taken to the best hospital in Karachi,"
Qutubuddin Aziz wrote in the Guardian. "Due to heavy smoking, she developed
gum troubles for which she was treated by an eminent dentist of her choice."
How the regime lied. None of the doctors were of my choice. And I didn't smoke.
I was starved for conversation, for communication, for any exchange of
ideas. I was lucky to have my cats with me at 70 Clifton, but they didn't make up
for human company. The regime wanted me to remain completely
incommunicado. I was surprised, therefore, when I received a request to appear
in court in March 1983 to give evidence at the trial of one Jam Saqi, a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

196

Communist who was being tried on various charges, among them working
against the ideology of Pakistan and spreading dissatisfaction against the armed
forces.
I had never met Jam Saqi. He had in fact opposed my father. But Jam
Saqi, it turned out, had called upon a number of prominent politicians to define
the issues to determine whether the charges against him were valid or not. I was
more than willing to discuss the illegality of Martial Law, although I wasn't sure of
the regime's motives for permitting me to appear in person. Perhaps they wanted
to paint me as a "Communist sympathizer." But the more important issue for me
was the right of every defendant to an open and free trial. Besides, the court
would provide me a platform to air my own political views for the first time in
almost two years.
When my first notice to appear arrived from the special military court on
March 25th, I wrote back through the jail authorities that I was a prisoner and
couldn't just show up in court at the appointed time. If the court wanted me to
give evidence, the court would have to make the arrangements.
Word came back immediately from the home office to be ready at 7 A.M.
the following morning. I was. At eleven o'clock, a new message arrived. My
appearance had been rescheduled for the same time for the following day. I was
ready again at 7 A.M. on March 27th. Again I waited for four hours. And again,
they delayed my appearance for twenty-four hours. I consoled myself by thinking
the regime wanted to confuse the supporters who would gather to see me. When
they did come for me on the third day, every precaution had been taken to isolate
me from the public.
The streets en route to the court were totally deserted, the entire route
having been blockaded by the police. Heavy contingents of police were posted at
all the entry points to Kashmir Road and pedestrian crossings were crisscrossed
with barbed wire. When I arrived at the makeshift military court set up in a sports
complex, I discovered the court, too, had been cleared. Jam Saqi's relatives and
the relatives of the others were permitted to sit in the waiting room only on the
condition that they did not speak to me. I didn't care. I was so happy to see the
few lawyers who were there, as well as Samiya, Salma, and my cousin Fakhri,
who had somehow managed to get special permission to pass through the
blockades. Most of all I welcomed the opportunity to talk.
The courtroom was small, a colonel sitting behind a desk flanked by a
major and a magistrate. We sat in the three rows of chairs in front of them, Jam
Saqi remaining shackled throughout the proceedings. I thought it sad that even in
this small room the army considered it necessary to keep on the iron bars. Jam
Saqi was also asking the questions, as military courts didn't permit lawyers to
defend the accused.
I was scheduled to testify for one day, but I gave such long answers to the
questions Jam Saqi asked me that my testimony spread over two days. His
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

197

questions did not have easy or short answers: "We have been accused of
working against the ideology of Pakistan. Is there an ideology of Pakistan?"
"What do you think of the Iranian Revolution?" "Is there any question of Martial
Law in Islam?"
I knew that a culture of underground literature had grown, with
photostatted leaflets and poorly printed booklets circulating among the
intelligentsia in the major cities, passed surreptitiously from hand to hand. Some
printers, at a price, kept their presses open at night, secretly printing by flashlight,
then destroying the plates. This was my one chance to give the party line and to
discredit Martial Law. I was going to take it.
"In determining with clarity whether Martial Law has a place in Islam or
not, we need to understand the concept of Martial Law and the concept of Islam,"
I responded to the third question. "Islam is the submission before the will of Allah,
whereas Martial Law is submission before the army commander. A Muslim
submits only before the will of Allah.
"The term Martial Law, if I remember clearly, is a term derived from the
days of Bismarck and the Prussian Empire. To integrate the territories he
conquered, Bismarck superseded the law prevailing in those territories with his
own law, based on his whim and enforced at the point of a gun. Martial Law,
before the Second World War, also referred to the rule of an occupying army.
The word of the commander of the occupying army superseded the existing law.
"Under colonialism, the indigenous people were treated as second-class
citizens, denied a government of their choice, denied the right to shape their own
destiny according to their hopes and desires and according to what would be
economically beneficial for them. In the wake of World War Two and the
withdrawal of colonial powers from most of the colonies, the people of the newly
independent countries enjoyed freedom and liberty for a little while. This was the
period when nationalist leaders such as Nasser, Nkrumah, Nehru, and Su-karno
insisted on bringing social equality and justice to their people. But the former
colonial powers, now restructured in shape, intended to keep their own people
happy and, whether they consciously decided this or not, they ended up
supporting a military-mullah complex. This mullah-military complex denied the
people charge of their own destiny and the fruits that would avail from guiding
this destiny. The situation was further complicated by the rivalry between the
Soviet Union and the United States of America.
"Many of the newly independent states are now ruled by some form of
military administration. However, an administration which is based on force and
not consensus cannot be congruent with the central principles of Islam, which
lays emphasis on consensus. Second, military regimes always come into power
at the point of a gun or the threat of the use of force, whereas in Islam there is no
concept of the usurpation of power. Therefore, we can see that there is no
question of Martial Law in Islam." My photostatted words would later find their
way into press rooms, bar associations, and even the prison cells of political
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

198

activists.
The courtroom was closed to the press, but one British correspondent
evidently managed to gain admittance. No one knew he was there until suddenly
a man entered and whispered into the colonel's ear.
"Where?" the colonel asked. The man inclined his head toward the back of
the room.
"I believe you are a journalist," the colonel's voice boomed. "Journalists
are not permitted. You are to leave immediately."
I caught a quick glimpse of a man dressed in shalwar khameez, whom
everyone had taken for a fair-skinned Pathan, being escorted out of the
courtroom. But at least he had gotten a piece of the story. "Miss Bhutto appeared
composed and in good health and proceeded to demonstrate that she has lost
none of her eloquence or wit," the correspondent for the Guardian subsequently
wrote.
My health, however, was not as good as it appeared. My generally
depleted condition was aggravated by the disloyalty of some PPP leaders in April
1983. Once more Zia was on the move, trying to establish the political base
which had been denied him since the coup. Planning to announce the latest step
to "Islamicize" the country in August, Zia was seizing the occasion to tour Sindh
for the first time since he overthrew my father and buried the Constitution of
1973. Not surprisingly, the people reacted to his visit with fury and anger.
Under my father's government, Sindhis had made great strides, winning
government jobs in customs, the police, and Pakistan International Airlines,
having quotas set aside for them in universities, gaining plots of land, and
earning high wages in newly constructed hospitals, sugar mills, and cement
factories. Under Zia, all this had been reversed. Once more Sindh was being
discriminated against. The state held some of the best land in Sindh. Under Zia,
it was parceled out to army officers instead of landless farmers. The Sindhis who
had risen to management positions in industry were being replaced with retired
army officers. Despite the fact that 65 percent of the country's revenue came
from the Sindhi port of Karachi, little of the revenue found its way back into the
province. The economic woes of Sindh fueled the fires of indignation which had
begun burning with the assassination of my father. Many in the province felt that
if he had not been a Sindhi, he would not have been killed.
After the local bodies elections of 1979, the elected PPP councillors of
Badin and Hyderabad passed resolutions condemning the execution of my father
and paying tribute to him. In retaliation, Zia had begun disqualification
proceedings against PPP councillors all over Sindh. Now Zia was seeking
acceptability from the few remaining PPP councillors, asking them to receive him
on his tour of the province. To my horror, the newspapers seemed to imply that
they were considering acquiescing to his wishes.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

199

How could I get a message out? The servants were searched coming and
going from 70 Clifton and were followed by intelligence agents on motorcycles as
they went about their errands. Finally I asked one of the servants to act ill in front
of the guards and pretend to go on leave to his home in Larkana.
"I hope your son is not going to meet with Zia" was my verbal message to
the Sindh PPP chief whose son was one of the councillors. "As you know, it's
against party policy. Please pass the word along."
I sent a message as well to the PPP councillor in Larkana. "You and the
others can put yourselves in the hospital or you can leave Larkana and not be
traceable," I told him. "But don't go to meet Zia."
I was helpless with fury when I turned on the television and saw that some
had met Zia anyway. They had evidently decided in a meeting that the party
couldn't take action against all of them. I was deeply disappointed. Once more,
politicians were serving their individual ambitions at the expense of the unity of
the party. Perhaps I was being too idealistic, but I expected more. I had no
choice but to make a forbidden political phone call to a PPP president. "I want
you to expell the PPP councillors who met with Zia. They have violated party
discipline," I told him rapidly, knowing that with the phone being monitored, I
couldn't afford to waste any time. The phone immediately went dead. It was
never reconnected.
I received no more calls from my relatives. The few visitors I had been
allowed were stopped. The searchers at the gate cracked down on the
household staff. As they passed in and out of the compound, they were made to
take off their shoes and socks. Their hair was searched. The packets of meat
and vegetables the cook brought from the market were cut open. Even the
garbage was searched.
In total isolation again, I felt increasingly ill. The pain intensified in my ear.
When I rubbed my left cheek, I felt little sensation. And the noises were
increasing again.
I was walking through the reception area at 70 Clifton one evening in April
when the floor seemed to rise toward the ceiling. I gripped the arm of the sofa to
steady myself, waiting for the attack of dizziness to pass. Instead a wall of
darkness advanced toward me. I pitched forward onto the couch, in a faint.
Luckily, a staff member saw me collapse. "Quick. Quick. Miss Sahiba
needs a doctor," he ran to tell the jail staff. And once again, it seemed as if God
was protecting me. Instead of the usual bureaucratic routine of having to write to
the Home Department for medical attention, then waiting for several days,
sometimes two weeks for clearance, the police brought a doctor within hours
from the emergency room at MidEast Hospital. And once again, the infection in
my ear had burst outward rather than inward.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

200

"Your condition is very dangerous," the doctor said, after examining my
ear. "You must see an ear specialist."
"If you don't specify that I need a specialist, then the regime will continue
to claim I don't have an ear problem," I told him.
The young doctor had the courage to write my need for an ear specialist
on his records for the regime in very specific language. The regime sent the ear,
nose, and throat specialist who had operated on my sinuses before to see me.
Preferring privacy, he does not want his name to be mentioned in this book. But
he was to stabilize my health and perhaps even to save my life.
"There is a perforation in your ear," this doctor told me, confirming my
suspicions about the regime's doctor during my detention at Al-Murtaza four
years before. "The perforation has led to a middle ear and mastoid bone
infection." My current infection would have to be drained regularly to relieve some
of the pressure on the facial nerve, which was causing the numbness. When the
infection was arrested, I'd need an operation. "You should go abroad for
microscopic surgery," he said. "We don't have the technology here. We'd have to
saw open your skull. This is a dangerous procedure. For your own safety, you'd
be far, far better off to go abroad."
I looked at him numbly. Was he implying something beyond the risks of
this type of surgery in Pakistan? I knew that one of my doctors had been
approached by the regime in 1980 to say that I had an inner ear problem, rather
than a middle ear problem, and was also in need of psychiatric treatment. "We
will form ten medical boards to hold up your diagnosis," he had been told. What a
nice solution it would have been for the regime to dismiss me as a psychiatric
case. But the doctor had refused. Now this doctor was adamant that I leave
Pakistan. "I can do the operation here, but I'm frightened they'll put pressure on
me to do something under the anesthesia," he said. "Even if I refuse, they'll get
somebody else to do it. On all counts, it's much better for you to go abroad."
I applied to the regime for permission to leave the country on medical
grounds. At first, there was no response. But I needed the time anyway. "You
won't be strong enough for general anesthesia for several months," the doctor
told me. "You'll have to build up your system." Like my mother, I was put on a
high-protein diet of milk, steak, chicken, and eggs.
But my ear did not improve. I began to lose feeling on the left side of my
face. My head pounded steadily, the clicking in my ear making it almost
impossible to hear anything else. The doctor got permission from the authorities
to make weekly visits to try to drain the infection at 70 Clifton. And he was made
to suffer for his medical concern for a Bhutto.
"You drive often to Hyderabad, don't you?" his neighbor, a superintendent
of police, asked him shortly after he began his weekly visits. "Have you seen
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

201

∆εατη Wish?" The next day a video of the film was delivered anonymously to his
house. Threatening phone calls followed, as well as a notice from the income tax
authorities that he was being audited for tax evasion. His professional integrity
was even questioned by the Martial Law regime, who served him a show-cause
notice as to why he should not be dismissed from the hospital. Still, the doctor
found the courage to treat me, which I deeply appreciated. He was about the only
human being I had to talk to, though the regime, I later found out from Peter
Galbraith, was claiming otherwise.
Peter Galbraith:
The Pakistani government finally responded at the end of June to the
letter Senator Pell and the other senators had submitted to Zia in December
about the specific political prisoners being held in Pakistan. Echoing Zia's
comments at the time, the letter said of Benazir's confinement:
"She is presently under detention at her residence in Karachi to prevent
her from indulging in political activities which are banned. However, she is
given all the comforts possible and doctors of her choice examine and treat
her when required. She is allowed interviews with friends and relatives. Eight
close relatives are allowed to stay with her in groups of three at a time. She is
allowed to use twenty-four personal servants of her choice and has a
telephone for her use."
Soon afterwards I received a call from a cousin of Benazir's. I asked her
about the facts in the letter.
"Not true," she exploded. "No friends have been able to visit her. Her
sister, Sanam, has been able to see her only once in the previous three
months. Her cousin Fakhri has also had a hard time seeing Benazir. She
cannot even go out into the garden. She is lonely and ill. I am worried about
her."
I sent Senator Pell a memo. The timing was fortuitous. Yaqub Khan,
Pakistan's foreign minister and former ambassador to Washington, was in
town. Yaqub had made many friends in Washington and had a reputation as
a straight-shooter. I did not think Yaqub would be party to any duplicity on
Benazir's treatment. When Senator Pell asked the foreign minister about the
apparent discrepancy between the official account of Benazir's treatment and
these new facts, Yaqub stiffened. He seemed genuinely shocked and
promised to look into the matter when he returned to Pakistan.
June 21, 1983. The longest day of the year and my thirtieth birthday. Ever
the optimist, I had written to the home secretary explaining that I had had no
visitors in months and would like permission to see my school-friends on my
birthday. Much to my surprise and delight, the regime agreed.
In the evening, Samiya, her sister, and Paree trooped in bearing a
chocolate cake which Paree had spent hours baking herself. Under the watchful
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

202

eye of the policewoman, we hugged and kissed each other. "Thank God the cake
is safe," Samiya said. "They searched everything else so thoroughly we were
scared they'd cut into the cake before you could."
Victoria Schofield and others of my friends in England had not forgotten
me either. As my birthday approached, I found out later, Victoria had written to
the current president of the Oxford Union, pointing out that this was my third
birthday in detention. On June 21st, the Oxford Union adjourned for a minute's
silence, an honor normally afforded an ex-president only when he or she dies.
Another old friend and former president of the Cambridge Union, David Johnson, was in the debating chamber of the Oxford Union at the time. He
subsequently arranged for a prayer to be said for me the following Sunday at all
the public services at Westminster Abbey and at St. Paul's Cathedral in London.
Both were lovely expressions of concern and friendship.
The expression of concern which arrived about the time of my birthday
from a member of the regime was more suspect. "Please be ready at seven
o'clock this evening," one of the jail officials told me. "We are taking you to a
government rest house."
"Why?" I asked him.
"Because the Martial Law administrator wishes to meet with you," he said
almost triumphantly.
The Martial Law administrator? "I will not go to meet the general," I said.
The jail official was shocked. "But you have to go. You are a prisoner," he
said.
"I don't care," I told him. "I will not meet him. You'll have to drag me there,
and even then I will shout and scream and make a scene. I will not go to my
captors."
The jail official scurried away, mumbling that I wasn't being sensible, that
my refusal to meet with General Abbasi would not be good for me. But I didn't
care. To those of us opposing Zia, any contact with the hated military rulers was
regarded as a sellout. To go to them would be tantamount to accepting their
authority and tacitly recognizing them.
That night I began packing a suitcase, convinced that retaliation would
come from the regime in the form of going back to jail. I collected what had
become a familiar list of prison supplies—pens, diaries, insect repellent, toilet
paper—but no one came to take me to prison. Instead, to my absolute surprise,
the Martial Law administrator came to visit me at 70 Clifton.
It was unheard of for the arrogant military rulers so used to summoning
and commanding to actually come to visit a leader of the opposition. I stared in
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

203

disbelief at the white-haired general sitting at 70 Clifton in his khaki uniform
during the first of his several visits. His message was always the same.
"I know you are ill," he kept telling me. "The fact that I'm in the army
doesn't mean that I'm not concerned. Remember, our families have known each
other for generations. I would like nothing better than to see you receiving
medical treatment abroad. But we can't afford any political embarrassments."
Remain polite, I willed myself. There is no point in showing your hand. I
guessed that General Abbasi had come to gauge my morale and probe as to
what I would do if allowed to go abroad. I gave him the impression that I was
anxious to have my treatment and to return home immediately. In a way this was
true, because at the time I had no intention of staying in exile. I had every
intention, however, of taking every opportunity I could to lambast the regime.
I didn't realize at the time what a bind the regime was in. The doctor had
put on record that I needed medical treatment abroad and that if anything
happened to me in detention the onus would be on the regime. There was the
added pressure from Senator Pell and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
and possibly from Yaqub Khan. As the summer of 1983 dragged on, my
detention had become not only an embarrassment to the regime but
counterproductive. In my isolation at 70 Clifton, however, I knew none of this.
Instead I was jeopardizing my possible release by once more getting involved in
politics.
The disturbances in Sindh during Zia's tour had not diminished. As August
14th neared, Pakistan Independence Day and the date Zia had chosen to
announce yet another bogus election schedule, the MRD launched its second
mass movement to restore democracy. I followed the MRD call for agitation
closely from 70 Clifton, reading the newspapers carefully and listening intently to
the BBC. At great risk, I communicated by message with the PPP leaders who
had organized a discrete cell at the nearby MidEast Hospital and with my home
district of Larkana, sending political instructions and helping to arrange funds.
This MRD movement was different from prior ones. In the past, the mere
mention of the words "protest movement" would bring the regime sweeping down
on political activists, arresting them in thousands to preempt any action and to
leave the people leaderless. Now the MRD leaders were being left free to court
arrest—which they did. The police did not even prevent the crowds from
gathering to cheer the MRD leaders on. The landlord class in Sindh threw
themselves into the movement, providing tractors and trucks to transport party
supporters and supplying better communication through their managers.
As the movement slowly grew, I smuggled out several letters to party
officials from 70 Clifton, briefing them on what to tell foreign diplomats and what
to tell the press, urging them to sustain the momentum and not give the regime
the time to mop us up. If the messages were discovered, I knew that instead of
being sent abroad, I'd be sent back to prison. But the political emancipation of the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

204

people of Pakistan overrode anything else for me. To deflect the suspicions of
the jail officials during their visits, I feigned more weakness than I felt. Normally,
anger and defiance overruled my feelings of sickness in my weekly visits from
the jail officials. But during the Sindh uprising of 1983, I consciously kept my eyes
on the carpet so they couldn't see my spirit, and would leave convinced that I
was too ill to be thinking of anything else.
Meanwhile, the PPP leader Jatoi was pressuring me to get a message for
the people from my mother. With great difficulty, somebody contacted my mother
by phone. Tell Benazir to issue the statement under my name, she relayed back.
I sat before the electric typewriter and, in between bouts of power failures, typed
like a demon, the words rushing through my fingers and filling the pages rapidly.
"My patriotic and heroic Countrymen, my honorable Brothers and Sisters,
my brave Sons and Daughters," I began my mother's call to the nation, which
was translated into Urdu and Sindhi and distributed surreptitiously throughout the
province. "The aim of our movement is civil disobedience. For six long years we
have been facing persecution and oppression. Our calls for resumption of
democracy have been ignored, our workers have been imprisoned and
sentenced to death. Enough is enough. We appeal to all the bus owners to take
their buses off the roads, to all the railwaymen to stop plying the trains. To the
policemen we say: follow the example of your brothers in Dadu and do not shoot
innocent people who are your brothers. Do not be frightened of this movement. It
is for our people, for our poor, for our children so that they do not live in poverty,
hunger, and disease. Struggle for your Parliament, for your Government, for your
Constitution so that the decisions are taken for the poor people and not for the
junta and its stooges. . . ."
The movement exploded into an intense and very widespread expression
of discontent against Zia ul-Haq. Railway stations were ransacked. Trucks and
buses stopped running. Police stations were burned. Hundreds of people lost
their lives. Zia himself was almost killed by a supposedly friendly crowd. The
helicopter he was believed to be in was stormed shortly after it landed in Dadu
and its occupants were attacked. Actually, Zia was in a second helicopter, which
veered away to land somewhere else. When he was discovered in a rest house,
he narrowly escaped being lynched.
The uprising in Sindh soon spilled over into the other provinces. The bar
associations in Quetta, Baluchistan, and Peshawar in the Frontier defied the ban
against political statements and called for elections. In Lahore, riot police sealed
all the gates of the High Court to prevent the lawyers from forming a protest
procession, then pelted them with stones. A procession of lawyers went out
anyway, led by one of my father's former lawyers, Talaat Yaqub. "You who want
to stay at home, take these bangles," Talaat Yaqub shouted at the predominantly
male Lahore Bar Association, throwing off her glass bangles and waving the
Pakistani flag. "I am calling for freedom." Hundreds of lawyers joined her,
chanting for democracy and marching defiantly into the clutches of the police.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

205

The nationwide rebellion was not crushed by the guns and tanks of the
army until the second week in October, leaving particular bitterness in the hearts
of the Sindhis. Eight hundred people were reportedly killed. Whole villages were
razed and crops burned. Women reportedly were molested by the army, bringing
back dark memories of the army's rampage in Bangladesh twelve years before.
In the ashes of fury, Sindhi nationalism was born. The move toward secession
escalated in the other minority provinces as well. The fragile federation of
Pakistan was strained to the breaking point under the ruthlessness of Zia and six
years of Martial Law.
The Reagan administration, however, stood by its man. "Newsweek
reported that Washington considers Zia its trump card in its global strategy," I
noted in my journals on October 22nd. "One Western intelligence source is
quoted as saying that the CIA has 'substantially' expanded its operation in
Pakistan. Last week Newsweek said the CIA was involved in holding up Zia's
tottering regime. They want to make sure Zia does not become another Shah of
Iran. Over the past year and a half, large numbers of American spooks operating
in Egypt have moved from Cairo to Islamabad. The report concluded: 'It has
become clear that Zia will cede power only when he is forced to do so.' " And I
remained locked up at 70 Clifton, now in my fifth year of detention.
Darkness. Roaring in my head. Wave after wave of darkness. I woke up in
my bedroom soon after the Sindh uprising to find the doctor's hand on my pulse
and a great look of relief on his face. I had had a bad reaction to the local
anesthetic he'd used to drain my ear, he told me, but there was no way to
summon emergency help. The phone lines at 70 Clifton were dead. A month
later, I suffered a severe attack of vertigo, totally losing all sense of balance and
becoming violently nauseated. Again, there was no way for the doctor to
summon medical help.
For days after the treatments for my ear, I was feverish, coughing and
sweating. After giving me an audiogram, the doctor determined that I had
suffered a hearing loss of almost forty decibels. "I cannot take responsibility for
the health of the patient if I continue to treat her in detention," the doctor informed
the home secretary in November, applying for permission to perform further
treatments in the hospital. "With the onset of winter months, even slight nose or
throat infections will cause more damage to her hearing. Unless surgical
measures are taken soon, possibility of complications like paralysis of the nerves
of the face and loss of balance mechanism exists." The permission for hospital
treatment was finally approved and further treatments went more smoothly. But I
was having difficulty preparing myself physically and psychologically for the
possibility of going abroad for surgery.
I had been in detention for so long I was suspicious of everyone and
everything. The thought of putting my life into a stranger's hands, even those of a
British surgeon, made me apprehensive. To double-check whether or not I
needed an operation, I smuggled my medical records to Dr. Niazi in London. He
concurred with the medical diagnosis.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

206

Yet I still felt conflicted. Thousands of political prisoners remained in
unspeakable conditions in jails throughout Pakistan, many facing death
sentences. In my own incarceration, I felt I was a source of inspiration and
comfort to them. I shared their suffering, their pain, their defiance. They were
there for me, and I for them. Would they feel orphaned if I left them? Would they
feel deserted?
As December progressed, I felt sure the regime would have to release me
soon. I had heard nothing from the authorities during the rebellion in Sindh. I
knew they wouldn't release me at the height of the troubles, knowing I would take
the news abroad. But now the rioting had subsided. They no longer had an
excuse.
I was also strong enough now to make the journey. Though the doctor had
planned to insert a drainage tube in my ear to allow me to fly, he now said I
would be all right taking decongestants and chewing gum during takeoff and
landing. The stress and anxiety which had contributed to my bad reactions during
my earlier ear treatments had lessened with the regime's decision to allow
Sanam to visit me every day. The doctor had insisted to the authorities that there
was no way for me to regain my health if the regime continued to refuse me
human contact.
Toward the end of December, the authorities asked Sanam and me for our
passports, our visa forms, our foreign exchange forms. "Make reservations," we
were told. But when the day would come for our departure, no one would come
for us. I spent the time tying up my personal affairs, arranging to have the houses
managed in my absence, straightening out my taxes. Another flight came and
went.
Our next scheduled flight was in the early hours of January 10, 1984.
Without warning, the authorities arrived at 70 Clifton at 11:30 P.M. "You're leaving
tonight," they said. "You have a few hours to pack." I heard their words in
disbelief. Hastily, I typed up a last message for the people. "Brave Party Workers
and Dear Countrymen," I began it. "Before embarking on this journey in
connection with ill health, I seek your leave, your prayers, and your blessings. . .
." I felt numb as I gathered up my things, and put my cat in a traveling case. After
all that had happened to me in the last seven years, even the good things
seemed unreal.
Sanam was waiting for me in the courtyard in an unmarked car. There was
no one on the roads as we were sped to the airport and put in a side room by
ourselves. I didn't allow myself the slightest bit of excitement. I had just finished
reading Oriana Fallaci's A Man. Air force planes had been sent to bring the
protagonist back to the airport after his flight had taken off.
We were taken out to the Swissair plane by the police. As I walked up the
passenger stairs, I saw the smile on the stewardess's face. I'll never forget it. It
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

207

wasn't a smile of a policeman or a Martial Law authority or a jailer. It was the
smile of a civilian, another human being. The door to the plane closed. At 2:30
A.M., Sanam and I took off for Switzerland. No planes came after us. I had no
idea until I talked to Peter Galbraith later why, after seven years of Martial Law,
Zia had chosen this moment to release me.

Peter Galbraith:
In late December, the Foreign Relations Committee asked me to travel to
South Asia to prepare a report in connection with the Committee's review of
regional security issues. I took a letter with me to Yaqub Khan signed by
Committee Chairman Percy and Senator Pell, reminding him of his
government's statement that Benazir was permitted visits from friends. "Mr.
Galbraith is a personal friend of Miss Benazir Bhutto dating back to their days
as classmates at Harvard University," their letter pointed out. The senators
asked that I be granted permission to visit her.
I planned my visit to Pakistan so as to make Karachi the last stop. This
time the U.S. embassy was extremely helpful. The decision on whether I was
to be granted permission to see Benazir, I was told, was being made by
General Zia himself.
I arrived in Karachi late in the evening on January 9th. Not having
received any response to my request to see Benazir, I had made an
arrangement to see Sanam the next day. I was very disappointed and, once
more, wrote Benazir a long letter.
Early the next morning I received a call from the U.S. consulate to come
right over. When I arrived, the deputy consul-general told me that Benazir had
been taken to the airport shortly after midnight and put on a Swissair flight.
Sanam had gone with her.
I couldn't believe it. I had a consulate car take me to 70 Clifton. The ever
present police guards were gone. The house was all shut up. Benazir was
free.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

208

TAKING ON
THE DICTATOR
1984-1988

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

209

11
THE YEARS
OF EXILE

“Mummy!” "Pinkie! You're free. How I've dreamed of this day!"
I look at the horizons, the unending space as we step out of the Geneva
airport. After three years of being constrained by walls, my eyes take time to
adjust. I can't believe I'm free.
The phone is already ringing when we arrive at my mother's flat. "Yes,
yes, she is really here," my mother says over the phone to Mir and Shah. "What
you heard on the BBC about her release is correct."
Mir Shah Nawaz. My brothers' voices and mine interrupt each other in our
excitement. "How are you?" I shout over the line, pressing the receiver to my
good ear. "Thank God you're alive," Mir shouts back. "I'm coming to see you
tomorrow." "Stay for a week, so I can come too," Shah adds. "Oh Shah, I can't," I
tell him. "I have to go to London to see the doctor." We make a promise to see
each other as soon as possible.
The phone rings constantly from Los Angeles, London, Paris—my
mother's friends and relatives calling to congratulate her on my release. I wasn't
ready to talk to anyone yet, and only spoke to Yasmin and Dr. Niazi in London.
Ardeshir Zahedi, a friend of my parents and Iran's former ambassador to the
United States, arrived with caviar. My mother, Sunny, and I stayed up talking
through the night. It all seemed so unbelievable. Yesterday I had been a
prisoner. Today I was free, with my mother and sister. We were together. We
were all alive.
Mir! A little brown-haired girl pulling at my coat! "Meet your niece, Fathi,"
Mir told me, standing in my mother's flat on my second day of freedom. Was my
brother really standing in front of me? I saw his lips moving, heard my own voice
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

210

responding. The noise of our reunion must have been deafening, but I can't
remember a thing we said. At twenty-nine, Mir looked so handsome, his dark
eyes flashing one minute, gentling the next as he lifted his eighteen-month-old
daughter to give me a kiss. "Wait till you see Shah," Mir laughed. Shah had been
eighteen the last time I'd seen him, just a boy. Now he was twenty-five with a
longed-for mustache.
I watched the sun come up over the Alps, felt the cold clear air bathe my
face. It felt wonderful although my ear was blocked and numb. Traffic was
beginning to stir and I scanned the street below. There were no intelligence vans
parked near the building, no agents that I could see hiding in doorways. Was it
really true? Was I truly free? I rubbed my ear. My discomfort was a reminder of
why I'd come abroad.
Meanwhile, word of my release was spreading among the Pakistani exile
community scattered around Europe and highly concentrated among the 378,000
Pakistanis living in England. When Sunny and I flew on to London that afternoon,
a crowd of Pakistanis had gathered to greet me at Heathrow Airport. From the
sound of political slogans in the air, I felt as if I were back in Karachi.
Yasmin Niazi, Heathrow Airport:
You can't imagine the number of people at the airport, including the British
press, all pushing and shoving to catch a glimpse of Benazir. It was as if she
had come back from the dead. No one ever thought they'd see her again.
"Who is she, a film star or something?" an English policeman asked me as he
and another policeman called in struggled to control the crowd. "She's our
political leader," I told him. "A politician?" he said in amazement.
"Have you come into exile?" the press asked Benazir when she finally
came through the gate. Her answer was a great relief to the Pakistanis
thronged at the airport as well as the millions who heard it later over the radio
or read it in the newspapers. "Exile? Why should I go into exile?" she said. "I
am only in England for medical treatment. I was born in Pakistan and I'm
going to die in Pakistan. My grandfather is buried there. My father is buried
there. I will never leave my country." Her words brought great hope to all her
countrymen, especially the poor. "I am not giving up on you," her message
said. "I will stay by your side until my last breath. The Bhuttos keep their
promises,"
Flowers and fruit baskets filled up Auntie Behjat's small flat in London's
Knightsbridge area where Sunny and I shared a guest bedroom. Journalists and
old friends from Oxford called asking to see me, as did party leaders and
supporters. London was the seat of political activity for PPP members in exile:
My own brothers had lived here, and it was the base of many PPP leaders who
had fled Pakistan after the coup. The phone rang constantly with their requests
for appointments. "I'll only take ten minutes of your time," one after another said.
Others among the large population of Pakistanis in England simply came to the
front door, ringing the doorbell and clustering outside in the street. Auntie Behjat
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

211

and her husband, Uncle Karim, were very gracious, but the situation was
impossible. It grew more complicated when Auntie Behjat spotted a car full of
Pakistani men parked all day outside the building. "This is a free country. You
don't have to put up with that," Auntie Behjat told me when the car started
following me wherever I went. She called Scotland Yard and, miraculously, the
car disappeared. We felt a small triumph in being able to force Zia's agents to
leave me alone. But my apprehension remained.
For all that I was free, I dreaded going out of the flat. Every time I stepped
out the front door my stomach, my neck, and my shoulders tensed. I couldn't
walk two steps without turning around to see if I was being followed. After all the
years of living alone behind prison walls, even the crowded streets in London
seemed threatening. I wasn't used to people, to voices, to noise. I leapt into the
first taxi I saw instead of taking the tube to go to my doctors' appointments. When
I reached my destination and was forced to get out in the street, even for a short
distance, my heart would start pounding again and my breathing got shallow.
Adjusting to real life was very difficult.
I put on a veneer of self-confidence and hid my anxieties from everyone. I
had to. My years in detention and my family's treatment by the military regime
had elevated me in the eyes of many Pakistanis to superhuman status. The
publicity surrounding my release and my arrival in England had catapulted me
into a public figure there as well. It would hardly have been seemly or inspiring
for someone who had challenged Martial Law to suddenly succumb to an anxiety
attack on Hyde Park Corner. Breathe deeply, I told myself whenever I was forced
to go out. Move steadily. Don't panic.
A few days after I arrived in London, I received an unexpected visitor.
Peter Galbraith had just arrived from Karachi and wanted to have lunch with me,
Auntie Behjat told me. I had no idea of the role he had played in my release, and
was merely excited to be able to see an old friend. Summoning my courage, I left
the flat and took a taxi to the Ritz Hotel.
Peter Galbraith:
I wasn't altogether comfortable when I called her. It
funny situations where you haven't seen someone
compounded by the very different experience she'd been
to my own. I waited for her somewhat nervously in the
where people gather for tea.

was one of those
in seven years,
through compared
lobby of the Ritz,

She looked surprisingly well when she arrived and we went into lunch. I
didn't have any particular set of expectations, but she certainly seemed different.
She had a new kind of self-confidence, a much more relaxed self-confidence
than she'd had the last time I had seen her at Oxford in 1977.
She'd always been attractive, but now she seemed striking. And she was
very focused. There was no aspect of "I can't believe this is happening to me."
She picked up in mid-stride. I filled her in on developments in Washington, and
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

212

told about the efforts of Senator Pell and others on her behalf. I also brought her
up-to-date on some of our mutual friends and showed her pictures of my son.
As we walked back to her aunt's apartment after lunch, I urged her as a
friend to give up the dangerous life of politics. "In Pakistan you risk imprisonment
or even assassination," I told her. "Why not come to America and get on with
your life. Perhaps you could get a fellowship at Harvard's Center for International
Affairs."
"I'd love the chance to read the books on the Bhutto years and on the
years of Martial Law to see other people's interpretations," she told me. "But my
first obligation is to the party. In political terms, it makes more sense for me to be
here, where the Pakistani community is larger and less dispersed."
She did, however, seem excited by my suggestion that she come to
America for a working visit. She knew foreign influence and publicity could be
important in securing the release of the political prisoners in Pakistan. The only
problem as we walked and talked was her ear. I kept forgetting which ear she
was deaf in. I kept talking into the wrong ear.
My microscopic surgery in the last week of January took five hours. When
I came out of the anesthetic at University Hospital, my surgeon, Dr. Graham, was
there. "Smile," he said to me. I thought he was trying to cheer me up and groggily
complied. Later he gave me a sip of juice. "How does it taste?" he said.
"Delicious," I said. He made notations on my chart. "You came through the
operation fine," he said. "The facial nerve on the left side of your face isn't
damaged, and you haven't lost your sense of taste."
I recovered slowly with my mother at a temporary flat she had taken in the
pretty tree-lined area of Collingham Gardens. For weeks I lay flat in bed, unable
to sit up for more than ten minutes without my head pounding and being racked
by bouts of nausea and dizziness. When I finally could sit up, it was difficult to
bend my neck to read a book or to write without the pounding coming back. My
head often felt like it was going to explode. "Your reaction isn't unusual," Dr.
Graham assured me on my regular visits to have my ear examined and my
hearing checked.
I was startled, though, by his news at my six-week checkup. "There's the
possibility you'll need another operation in nine months to a year's time," he told
me. Nine months to a year? I'd no intention of staying in London that long. I was
already toying with the idea of going home to Pakistan, though my mother, Auntie
Behjat, Sunny, and Yasmin were all urging me to stay on in Europe.
"Take a break from politics and live with me for a while. Next time you go
back Zia will put you in prison and you might not get out alive," my mother
argued.
"Even in prison I can be a rallying point against the regime," I countered.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

213

"Why not be a rallying point against the regime from here?" the others
insisted. The doctor's words clinched their argument. But I still felt reluctant. Nine
long months. How could I best spend my time?
As I recuperated, I decided to mount an international campaign to expose
the regime's treatment of the forty thousand political prisoners still in jail in
Pakistan. Though Pakistan was receiving financial aid from Western European
countries as well as from the United States, the democratic countries were
paying little or no attention to Zia's human rights violations. As a prominent and
recently released political prisoner in exile, I was in a position to get the details of
what was happening in Pakistan out. Perhaps then the democratic countries
would use their leverage to help stop Zia from making arbitrary arrests and
holding political prisoners for years without charge or hearings, and sentencing
more and more innocent men to death just for their political opposition.
Eighteen political prisoners were about to be tried by a military court in
Rawalpindi, accused of conspiring to overthrow the government. Fifty-four others
were being held in Kot Lakhpat Jail in Lahore, charged with criminal conspiracy
and sedition for their alleged involvement with Al-Zulfikar. The PPP labor leader
at the Karachi Steel Mill, Nasser Baloach, was being tried with four codefendants in Karachi on the false charge of complicity in the hijacking, a charge
which could result in a sentence of death. Typical of Zia's military "justice," few
people in or out of Pakistan even knew the trial was taking place, or what, if any,
was the evidence against the accused.
I had only learned of the 1981 arrest of Nasser Baloach from the jail
superintendent at Sukkur Jail. It had taken two years for Nasser Baloach and his
co-defendants to be brought before a military court. Surrounded by the secrecy
of Presidential Order No. 4, which not only held that a man was guilty unless
proved innocent but forbade any disclosure of the court proceedings under the
Official Secrets Act, I had only found out about their trial when I received a note
in Karachi Central Jail from Nasser Baloach, smuggled in by a sympathetic jail
guard.
"The military court is so biased against us that we have already been told
that we are as good as dead bodies lying in a grave," he had written me in May
1983. "During the eight-hour proceedings we cannot take notes, drink water,
answer the call of nature, or offer prayers. Our hands and feet are bar-fettered.
When our defense lawyer could not attend, the proceedings continued with the
remark 'we need only the accused and the prosecutors.' " As of February 1984
his trial had still not been concluded.
I was concerned, too, about another labor leader, Ayaz Samoo, who had
been arrested in December 1983 and falsely implicated in the murder of a
political supporter of General Zia's. His trial before a military court was about to
get under way. Like Baloach, Samoo had been arrested in what the PPP saw as
an attempt by the Zia regime to crush the labor movement in the industrial city of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

214

Karachi. As was the case in Baloach's trial, the charge against Samoo was
punishable by death. We had to act, and act quickly.
When I could sit up in bed I started to compile a list of other political
persecutions with information from my own prison notes and reports coming from
sympathizers in Pakistan. I learned the value of providing information to Amnesty
International when I saw how the human rights organization could mobilize world
opinion, as they did in the case of Raza Kazim, a Pakistani international lawyer
arrested from his home in Lahore in January and not heard from again.
Amnesty's "Urgent Call for Action" on Raza Kazim's behalf was taken up in the
Western press.
"The recent disappearance of Raza Kazim of Lahore, Pakistan, is an
alarming case in point," ran a March article in The Nation about the numbing
numbers of human rights offenses worldwide. "The United States, which supports
Pakistan with $525 million annually in military and economic aid, has shown
callous indifference to the case. . . . Apparently the Secretary of State has
forgotten the letter of U.S. law governing the disposition of foreign aid, which
reads in part: 'No assistance may be provided. . . . to the government of any
country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of
internationally recognized human rights, including torture,. . . prolonged detention
without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty and the security
of person.'"
The timing of the article was perfect. I had been invited to speak to the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington in March. Armed
with reams of material about the political prisoners, and my old address book,
Yasmin and I flew off to America.
Once more I found myself walking the long corridors of Congress. As a
student at Harvard I'd taken advantage of the democratic process in America to
come to Washington in protest of America's involvement in Vietnam. Now I was
here to protest the dead democracy in my own country. On that first visit I hadn't
spoken out, anxious that I not be deported as a foreigner engaged in political
activity. Now I felt I couldn't talk enough.
For a week I talked incessantly about the need to end human rights
abuses and restore democracy to Pakistan with Senator Edward Kennedy, with
Senator Claiborne Pell, whom I thanked for his efforts toward my release, with
anyone I could get to listen. Peter Galbraith helped me make appointments with
others on Capitol Hill, including Senator Alan Cranston from California,
Congressman Stephen Solarz from New York, members of the State
Department, and aides from the National Security Council. I spoke with former
attorney general Ramsey Clark, who had come to Pakistan to observe my
father's court proceedings, and with Senator McGovern, whom I had supported
as a student at Harvard. Now I hoped he would support me in my lobbying to
bring human rights to Pakistan.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

215

Pakistan was already very much on the minds of legislators in
Washington. The $3.2 billion U.S. aid package voted to Pakistan in 1981 was in
peril of being cut off because of Pakistan's unverifiable nuclear program. The
Senate had gotten around this point in the past by basing aid not on whether or
not Pakistan had "the bomb," but on whether it had been tested. During my visit
in 1984, this loophole was being plugged by Senators John Glenn and Alan
Cranston in an amendment which precluded aid to Pakistan unless the president
of the United States verified in writing that Pakistan neither had a "nuclear
explosive device" nor was acquiring material to manufacture or detonate one. On
March 28th, the Foreign Relations Committee unanimously adopted the
amendment.
I hadn't come to Washington to debate the nuclear issue. I was therefore
caught off guard during a meeting with the head of the Foreign Relations
Committee, Senator Charles Percy, when he asked me if I favored the cutoff of
aid over the nuclear question. "Senator, cutting off aid will only create
misunderstandings between our two countries," I said after a moment's
hesitation. "Both our countries would be better served if aid were linked to the
restoration of human rights and democracy in Pakistan." Senator Percy, who had
known my father, smiled and thanked me for my views. And I went on to my next
meeting.
In between appointments I walked the long corridors to Peter Galbraith's
office at the Foreign Relations Committee. "You speak too fast," Peter coached
me, helping me make the most of the short meeting common on Capitol Hill.
"Speak slowly, and stress one point." I tried to follow his advice, though after
years of isolation the words that had been suppressed during all the years in
silence just kept spilling out. "Benazir Bhutto talks as if making up for lost time,"
Carla Hall wrote in a profile in the Washington Post in early April. "Sentences
shoot out in her vaguely British accent, well-ordered but racing off her tongue,
accompanied by a flutter of hands, which are swathing her forehead, raking her
hair."
Carla Hall was right. I was making up for lost time. And I was very
nervous. My memory, which had been excellent before the years of detention,
was now failing me. Often I searched for dates and names, sometimes
remembering them and sometimes not. And I was still uncomfortable around
people. Though I pushed myself to meet with as many government officials and
members of the press as possible, I found I dreaded the interviews. While talking
to Senator Cranston one day, I suddenly felt my cheeks go scarlet. The heat
spread over my face until beads of perspiration broke out on my forehead. "Are
you all right?" he asked in concern. "Yes, yes, I'm fine," I told him with more
composure than I felt.
The night of my speech to the Carnegie Endowment I felt especially
nervous. The audience was filled with State and Defense Department officials,
members of Congress, former ambassadors, and members of the press. The
Western press was now consistently portraying Zia as a "benign dictator" and the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

216

man who had brought "stability" to Pakistan. It fell to me to expose his human
rights violations and point to the long-term dangers to Pakistan's stability from
centralized military rule. The influential members of the audience could help bring
pressure to bear on Zia to free our political prisoners, to hold free elections, to
restore democracy to Pakistan. Their support was important.
"Calm down," I admonished myself when I moved to the podium. "Just
pretend that you're at the Oxford Union." But I couldn't. The debates at the Union
had been intellectual games. Now I felt the weight of the lives of thousands of
political prisoners and the political future of my country. "We in Pakistan are
confused and disappointed by the backing given Zia's illegitimate regime," I said
to the distinguished audience. "We do appreciate your strategic concerns, but
ask you not to turn your back on the people of Pakistan."
In the middle of the speech, I looked up at the audience—and lost my
place. There was silence in the hall while I desperately scanned my papers. How
could I? I wanted the earth to open and swallow me up. With as much aplomb as
I could muster, I found my place and continued, asking the members of the
government present to link U.S. aid to human rights. I felt better during the
question-and-answer period, and sat down at the end of my talk to applause. I
just wasn't my old self. But I had to press on.
From Washington Yasmin and I went to New York. To the consternation of
the Pakistani embassy, I had been granted a meeting with the top editors of Time
magazine at the Time-Life Building in New York, perhaps the first opposition
leader in Pakistan to receive such an invitation. But I had an advantage. I had
gone to Harvard with Walter Isaacson, now an editor at Time, and I had called
him from Washington to see if he could fix up a meeting. My arrival at the TimeLife Building with Yasmin caused quite a stir.
When Yasmin and I took the elevator to the forty-seventh floor and
walked into the private dining room, the editors gathered there looked at us in
shock. I didn't know what to do and thought perhaps that we had blundered into
the wrong meeting room.
"Didn't Walter meet you in the lobby?" someone finally said into the
silence. "He is downstairs waiting for you."
"I didn't see him," I replied.
"But how did you get past the security guards?"
"In Zia's Pakistan you learn how to dodge security," I smiled.
Over lunch the editors asked me so many questions that I didn't even
have time to eat the delicious fruit salad and cottage cheese luncheon they
served, a favorite meal from my years at Harvard. "U.S. aid to Pakistan is seen
by many Pakistanis as U.S. aid to Zia," I told them. "You all could help clear up
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

217

this misunderstanding by focusing media attention on human rights. For the
political prisoners in Pakistan, publicity literally means the difference between life
and death."
I got publicity I didn't expect as Yasmin and I came to the end of our two
weeks in America and prepared to return to London. On April 3rd, the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee reversed its unanimous position on the tough antinuclear requirements for American aid. Instead they passed a new amendment
allowing the continuation of aid to Pakistan with certification from the president
that Pakistan did not have a nuclear bomb, and that American aid would "reduce
significantly the risk that Pakistan will possess a nuclear explosive device."
Though I suspected the real cause for the change was intense pressure from the
Reagan administration, Senator Percy kindly gave me public credit for the
reversal of his vote.
When I returned to London I took a flat in the Barbican, a fortress-like
building close to St. Paul's Cathedral. I felt safe there. There was a security desk
in the lobby to announce all visitors to the building, and my tenth-floor flat, I noted
with my usual security consciousness, was too high for Pakistani agents to break
into or wire for sound. The building was home in exile, too, to Dr. Niazi and
Yasmin, and we were in and out of each other's flats all day.
Quickly, the Barbican became the de facto command center of the PPP
both for England and for the units abroad. The flat was soon overflowing with
files on the branches of the PPP in the United States, France, Canada, Germany,
Switzerland, Denmark, Sweden, and Austria as well as those in Australia, Saudi
Arabia, Bahrein, and Abu Dhabi. A dedicated staff of Pakistani volunteers was
soon in place. Sumblina, a young girl living in England, did the typing. Nahid, a
student activist in exile, answered the phone and helped Safdar Abbasi, a law
student and the son of PPP Central Executive Committee member Dr. Ashraf
Abbasi, answer letters from Pakistan. Bashir Riaz, a journalist who had helped
my brothers organize the campaign for my father's life, acted as our press
spokesman and arranged press interviews. Dr. Niazi joined forces with another
exile, Safdar Hamdani, and former minister of information Mr. Naseem Ahmad to
ensure that our information reached British members of Parliament. As always,
Yasmin did anything and everything to help. Together we turned out letters and
reports on the human rights abuses in Pakistan from the spare bedroom we had
converted into an office.
We sent photographs of political prisoners, their case histories, and letter
campaigns to the U.N. secretary-general, to Assistant U.S. Secretary of State for
Human Rights Elliott Abrams, to foreign ministers, to lawyers' syndicates and
international trade organizations. We met with British members of Parliament,
Amnesty International, and representatives of world leaders through their
embassies. Nasser Baloach's life hung in the balance. So did the lives of many
others. But we were losing the race.
In spite of protests by the bar associations all over Pakistan, three young
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

218

men falsely accused of murdering a policeman were hanged in August, following
a secret trial by a special military court. "The recent murder of the three young
men, who had been detained for three years in chains, might have been
prevented if the political circles and media in Europe and North America had
shown interest in their fate or that of the thousands of other prisoners being
held," I wrote to our growing mailing list of members of governments and the
press. "The Western nations should assert their influence and raise their voices
to save the lives of the political prisoners facing the gallows. . . . Please be so
kind as to take urgent and effective action in response to this earnest appeal."
Tony Benn, a Labour Member of Parliament, wrote a letter of protest to
the Pakistan embassy in London. He sent me a copy of his letter as well as the
reply from the regime's spokesman. Information Minister Qutubuddin Aziz. "Miss
Bhutto's allegation that there are more than 40,000 prisoners in Pakistan jails,
and that they are held in miserable conditions, bears no relevance to facts,"
wrote Qutubuddin Aziz. "There are, no doubt, prisoners in Pakistani jails as in
jails in any other country, but these prisoners are either convicted or suspected
criminals. The conditions prevailing in our jails are certainly not worse than in
most other developing countries. . . . While the government of Pakistan deals
severely with those who commit acts of terrorism and murder, it adheres to the
due process of law in every case." The regime's spokesman made no mention of
the ongoing protests by the Pakistani bar associations over the lack of due
process.
When we anticipated, or faced, another series of death sentences from
one of Zia's military courts, all of us worked overtime. Envelopes, stamps, and
letters spilled out of the office into the living room as we spent day and night
labeling, sealing, and posting. The regular volunteers would be joined by others,
including a former major in the Pakistan army and a superintendent of police now
living in exile. We drank endless cups of tea and coffee to keep ourselves going.
Zia wanted to hide his atrocities from the world by simply continuing to forbid any
observers from the outside. We did our best to expose him and to appeal to the
world's conscience on behalf of the prisoners.
It was essential to have specific information and documentation about the
circumstances of a political prisoner's arrest and the conditions under which he
had been held and tried. In Pakistan, where literacy rates are low and censorship
extremely tight, such information was often hard to come by. Often the only
people who had accurate and up-to-date details were the prisoners themselves.
With great difficulty, we set up a network of personal reportage from inside
the prisons, questionnaires filled out by the prisoners and smuggled back to us in
London. We used sympathetic jail guards, mailings to safe houses, relatives of
exiles flying in and out of Pakistan, sympathetic airline personnel, and mail drops
in Abu Dhabi and Saudi Arabia, where our letters were re-posted with a different
postmark to get past the regime's censors. And the information began to flow in.
The handwritten reply from Saifullah Khalid in Karachi Central Jail, a twentythree-year-old student from Larkana and one of Nasser Baloach's co-defendants,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

219

documented that he had been arrested in 1981 for his "political views" and was
"brutally" interrogated to implicate the "head of the Pakistan People's Party" in
the hijacking. Like all political prisoners, he had been moved around from prison
to prison and held incommunicado for months.
"I was held at Arazwali Fort for two days, three unknown places for a
week. Fort Balahisar for four days, Warsak Cantonment for ten days, one day at
Peshawar Central Prison, then FIA [Federal Investigation Agency] Center at
Karachi for six days, one month at CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] Center
Karachi, one month at Baldia torture cell in Karachi," replied the student of
political science, who three years after his arrest was still in prison and fearing
the death sentence. Now imprisoned in Karachi Central Jail, he wrote that he
"was kept in the punishment ward for ten days, and beaten thrice a day. During
interrogation bulbs of high voltage have weakened my eyesight, causing constant
headache and pain in my eyes. I was kept in iron leg fetters which resulted in
severe pain in my testicles. The prison doctor suggested I be shifted to Civil
Hospital for treatment. Three months later I am now here for hernia operation."
Like so many other political prisoners, Saifullah Khalid was at the mercy of
the regime. "My life and those of my co-accused are in danger, as the
prosecution demanded capital punishment," the student added in a postscript. "I
appeal to Amnesty to intervene in the matter and save our lives."
Nottingham. Glasgow. Manchester. Bradford. I traveled around England to
speak to Pakistani communities, adding more supporters to promote our
campaign. Germany. Denmark. France once a month to see my mother. I took
the list of the prisoners with me everywhere, meeting with former Prime Minister
Ankur Jorgensen in Denmark, who had known my father, with the Gaullists in
France, with the Green Party in Germany. With a heavy heart I wrote "martyred"
by the names of the three young men hanged in August.
I was apprehensive every time I landed back in England, fearing that I
would be turned away by the immigration authorities. At that time visas for
Pakistanis were issued by British Immigration at the airport, and were valid for a
single entry only. When I first arrived in England the immigration officials had
questioned me for forty-five minutes on where I would be staying and what I
would be doing. "I'm just a tourist," I assured them then and on every reentry,
feeling a flood of relief when the visa was finally stamped into my passport. But
soon I had so many visas stamped there that my passport was running out of
pages. I knew Zia would never issue me a new one. I prayed every time I
answered the immigration officials' questions and watched them look for my
name in their huge black book that they wouldn't see the beating of my heart. We
were making too much progress in our publicity campaign for the political
prisoners to absorb such a setback.
"I intend using every parliamentary and other opportunity to press the
British government to call on the Pakistan government to cease its murderous
campaign to eliminate political opposition, especially political opponents in the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

220

Pakistan People's Party," Max Madden, a member of the House of Commons,
wrote me in November. I received a response, too, from Elliott Abrams, the
assistant secretary for human rights in America, to whom I had written about
Nasser Baloach and Saifullah Khalid. "I share your concern about the inherent
unfairness of in camera military court proceedings against civilians, and in this
case, the disquieting allegation that confessions were obtained through torture,"
Mr. Abrams wrote. "Please be assured that our diplomats in Pakistan will
continue to follow these cases closely."
I was up every morning at 7 A.M. at the Barbican to clean the flat, do the
washing, and get ahead on the meals for the day, preparing simple lentil dishes
and leaving them to cook on the stove. Bashir Riaz brought halal meat and
chickens that had been slaughtered in accordance with Muslim custom from
London's Pakistani neighborhoods. And then to work. The mailings were
expensive. I budgeted as best I could, two-thirds of my money going to the rent,
the rest for the telephone bill, postage, and supplies. My mother had given me
some money to decorate the flat. I bought a secondhand rug, a few pots and
pans, and some lamps with no shades. The money was better spent on the
political work going on in the office.
We launched our own Urdu magazine, Amal (Action), with a few pages in
English, and distributed it each month to international organizations, foreign
embassies, and the exile community to keep them up-to-date on events in
Pakistan. Amal was produced on a shoestring budget, with Bashir Riaz working
as both editor and advertising salesman and Nahid cottoning everyone she could
for subscriptions. We smuggled the magazine into Pakistan, where activists
photostatted segments of it and distributed them to party supporters. Copies also
reached the jails so that the political prisoners would know they were not
forgotten. Amal proved to be invaluable for lifting morale. The prisoners loved it.
The regime did not.
"I am not coming to work today," our calligrapher suddenly told Bashir on
the telephone. "Why?" Bashir asked in dismay. Amal couldn't be published
without a calligrapher. Urdu printing is still done the old-fashioned way, with
calligraphers writing out the text by hand on wax paper. "The embassy has
offered me more money not to work for you," the calligrapher confessed. When
the printer called to say that he, too, had been pressured by the regime, we
thought Amal was doomed. But the printer turned out to be a party sympathizer
who not only refused to succumb to the regime's pressure, but agreed to hold his
presses open for us at night. Bashir also convinced the calligraphers who worked
for Pakistani newspapers in London to moonlight for us. Every time the regime
bought one back, Bashir tenaciously found another. And Amal continued.
In Pakistan, Zia started to flex his Martial Law muscle again, to remind the
people of his grip over them. While we ran articles about Nasser Baloach's unfair
and cruel treatment in Amal, we began receiving ominous reports from Pakistan
that he and his co-defendants were going to be sentenced to death. Our worst
fears were confirmed on the chill and windy morning of November 5, 1984, when
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

221

the military court in Karachi publicly announced its final verdict. Nasser Baloach
and the others were sentenced to "hang by the neck until dead."
At the Barbican we all went back into emergency mode, circulating appeal
after appeal for the lives of the condemned men in the international community.
Our sense of outrage deepened after a party sympathizer in Pakistan managed
miraculously to smuggle us secret documents suggesting that Zia had a direct
role in the death sentences. The documents showed that originally the military
court had sentenced only Nasser Baloach to death, and that the Martial Law
administrator of Sindh had been informed and did not object. But suddenly he
had changed his mind and directed the military court to "reconvene and
reconsider" its original judgment. Only Zia, his immediate superior, could have
got him to change his mind.
Moreover, we had Zia's signature on a piece of his "Chief Martial Law
Administrator" stationery confirming the four death sentences on October 26th, a
full ten days before his kangaroo court had made its verdict public. The only
avenue of appeal open to the condemned men was a mercy petition to Zia in his
capacity as president. What a farce. They had to appeal to the man who had
already confirmed their death sentences.
Many of the volunteers had tears in their eyes when they saw the
documents, but I was too angry. For the first time, we had evidence confirming
what we had always heard: Military sentences in political cases went through Zia
himself. We set to work editing and compiling the documents so they could be
printed as quickly as possible. If anything could rally the international community
and expose Zia's military courts as mere rubber stamps of the regime, these
documents could. Lord Avebury, who had been so instrumental in my mother's
release, now arranged a press conference for us to reveal the documents at the
British Parliament. And our campaign intensified.
Again people of conscience responded, from human rights organizations
to labor leaders. "Whilst we in this country are growing ever more conscious of
the threat to our own trade union rights, we must be equally aware of the
struggles being waged by our brothers and sisters in other countries," wrote
Nottingham trade union organizer Laurence Platt to the editor of the T&G
Record, a major trade union magazine. "There may still be time to save the lives
of labour leader Nasser Baloach and his three co-defendants who are awaiting
execution and protests should be made to the government of Pakistan and its
embassy here."
Lawyers everywhere were shocked into action. "These four men were
tried and sentenced by a special military court set up under Martial Law
regulations in Pakistan," read part of a statement signed by a group of prominent
British lawyers. "These courts are presided over by military officers who have no
legal training, and the trials are held in camera. The burden of proof is shifted
onto the accused, and it is upon them to prove their innocence. Furthermore they
do not have proper access to lawyers to conduct their cases.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

222

"We call upon the Government of Pakistan to stop such trials and
executions. We especially appeal to General Zia ul-Haq not to confirm the death
sentences passed on these four men and to spare their lives. We also call upon
the British Government, which supplies economic and military aid to the Zia
regime, to use their influence upon the Government of Pakistan to stop the
execution of these four men and further trials of this kind."
We were obsessed with saving the lives of the political prisoners. But in
the midst of our fight against death in Pakistan, others among the PPP
leadership in exile were more interested in advancing their own special interests
and power bases. The phone rang incessantly at the Barbican with requests from
these leaders, mostly ex-ministers from my father's government, for meetings
with me. Mercifully the Barbican allowed only fifteen visitors a day, though I
sometimes managed to squeeze in more by meeting with groups of five or six at
a time. I chafed and fidgeted throughout the meetings, thinking of all the
important work there was to do.
The PPP had always been a multi-class party, a coalition of many different
socioeconomic groups: Marxists, feudal landowners, businessmen, religious
minorities, women, the poor. Before my father's death, the conflicts of interests
between all these different groups had been bridged by my father's strong
personality and popular appeal. But in London, with the strain of exile and the
political leaders' fears of being forgotten at home, self-interest took an upper
hand to common goals. On top of everything else, there was an undeclared
battle for party leadership. The old guard in London realized that if they accepted
me once, they might have to accept me forever. "It is not in my destiny to follow
the father, then the mother, and now the daughter," one of them was reported as
saying when I'd first arrived in London.
"You must decide whose side you're on," the various leaders had lectured
me, each faction lobbying for greater importance in the PPP and probably
preparing for an eventual takeover.
"I'm not on anybody's side," I'd insisted. "If the party presented a united
front instead of the factions undercutting each other, we'd get more done." I'd
tried to sound as calm and reasonable as possible, anxious not to alienate the
old "uncles" and well aware of the weakness of my political position. Even though
the Central Executive Committee of the party had reaffirmed my position as
acting chairperson when I arrived in England, these men were old political hands.
I was a young woman, the age of their daughters. These men had run the PPP in
London since the time of the coup. I was newly arrived from Pakistan. They had
spent years building up their own power bases. I believed in reconciling past
differences, in balancing individual power bases for the greater good of the party.
When I'd returned from my trip to America, the most vocal group, the Marxists,
had attacked.
"You should never have gone to America," the leader of the Marxists
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

223

chided me, though he hadn't said a word before I'd gone. "The Americans are
friends of Zia's. We must join up with the Russians to put an end to him."
"What makes you think the Americans or the Russians are friends of
anybody?" I argued back. "The Americans are supporting Zia because of their
strategic considerations. The Soviets may want to support us today, but
tomorrow, if their strategic concerns change, they'll ditch us. We must not get
involved in these superpower rivalries, but fight for our own national interests. We
can't afford to fight global politics."
The regionalists soon joined the fray. "You are a Sindhi. You should stand
up for Sindh over the other provinces, or they will never forgive you," they
warned.
"Why play into the hands of the Martial Law regime, which uses the threat
of division to project the army as the unifying force in Pakistan?" I retorted.
"There are people who believe in democracy in all four provinces. Oppression
does not know the meaning of provincial boundaries. Aren't our energies better
spent fighting the common enemy instead of each other?"
The chauvinists, the establishment-oriented members of the PPP who
had been wheeling and dealing and seeking compromises with Zia, added their
voices of self-interest. My frustration grew and grew as the arguments wore on.
Here were the volunteers in the next room doing the essential nitty-gritty work of
the party to save the lives of our supporters in Pakistan. And taking up my time
were the old-guard politicians who insisted on putting their individual concerns
above the concerns of the people.
I finally lost my temper when one of the old "uncles" in exile arrived at the
Barbican, sat calmly back on the sofa, and demanded that I name him president
of the Punjab PPP along with his hand-picked slate. "I can't just appoint you," I
said in shock to this man who was not even popular among the Punjabi
politicians at home and who had spent his entire time since the coup in safety in
London. "It will anger the party and undermine our policy of deciding on merit and
by consensus."
"You don't really have much choice," he said to me patronizingly.
"The Marxists are angry at you. The regionalists have formed their own
organization. You can't afford to alienate me."
"But it is against PPP principles," I stuttered, still taken aback by his
demands.
"Principles," he scoffed. "Principles are fine. But people are in politics for
power. If you do not appoint me president along with my team, then I'm afraid I'll
have to explore other options. I may even start my own party. I will be your
biggest opposition."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

224

I felt my anger grow, a compendium of all the wasted hours I'd spent
listening to the bickering of the special-interest groups. And now this, a new ante
raised. This was the old way of Pakistani politics. Angle for yourself. Throw your
weight around. Grab every office you can. Blackmail. Threaten. I had had it with
the old ways. And with him. "Uncle," I said, taking a deep breath and leaning
forward in my chair. "You know if you leave the party, it will be hard for you to
even win a seat in Parliament."
"Really? Really?" he said, flicking his head back in surprise at my rude
answer. And he stalked out of the room—and eventually, out of the party. More
trouble, I mused, before pushing the thought out of my mind. I was never happy
when anyone left the party, but I came to realize that in politics nothing is
permanent. People leave, people join, people reconcile. What is important is that
a political party articulates the mood of a generation. Our work in London was
boosting the morale of the people and energizing the party in Pakistan. That was
what counted. Especially by December 1984, when it became clear that the PPP
needed all the energy it could muster.
Under pressure from the United States, Zia decided to hold elections by
March 1985. But first, it was announced, he would hold a national referendum on
December 20th. The wording of the Islamic referendum, as it came to be called,
would have been laughable if it hadn't been so clever. "Whether the people of
Pakistan endorse the process initiated by General Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, the
President of Pakistan, for bringing the laws of Pakistan into conformity with the
injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him)," it read. How could anyone in a country that was
95 percent Muslim vote against it? A "no" vote was tantamount to voting against
Islam. But politically, a vote of "yes" would be just as dire. A positive vote, Zia
announced, would constitute his "election" as president for the next five years.
The whole setup was nothing more than a smoke screen to give Zia the
mandate he desperately needed. No other military dictator in the subcontinent
had ruled for so long without one. And Zia wasn't going to take any chances.
Campaigning for a "no" vote, he declared as extra insurance, would be a crime
punishable by three years of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of $35,000.
Moreover, the ballots would be counted by the army in secret and the results
would not be challenge-able before the civil courts. Did he really think he could
pass the vote off as a fair and impartial one?
"Boycott," we urged in Amal, in interviews, in speeches, and in press
releases. "Boycott," the members of the MRD urged at home in Pakistan, where
even two religious parties denounced the referendum as a "political fraud in the
name of Islam." "Vote! You don't even need an identity card," countered the
loudspeakers the regime set up on street corners in Karachi while the regime's
agents hustled Afghan refugees onto buses heading for the polling stations in
Baluchistan and brought whole villages by the busload to other polling places.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

225

Predictably, the regime-controlled Pakistani press reported a turnout of 64
percent, over twenty million people, 96 percent of them voting "yes." But the
Manchester Guardian's reporter in Islamabad calculated that the turnout was as
low as 10 percent, as did Reuters news service. Our call to boycott the farce had
worked. "Had General Zia frankly and courageously put himself to the test
without the cover of 'religion,' he would in all probability have lost," read an
editorial in the London Times on December 12th. "That no doubt was why he did
not."
I had been waiting for the right time to return to Pakistan with the PPP
leaders in exile. Possibly this was it. "Now is the time to launch a protest against
Zia ul-Haq," agreed one of the party barons in a meeting called in a former PPP
minister's house in North London. "The referendum has exposed Zia's
unpopularity to the whole world." Others disagreed. "The country may not
respond," the counterargument went. "The people have been frozen into inertia
for too long. We should work up to a showdown." The discussion went back and
forth until one of the "uncles" turned to me. "I know the answer," he said. "We
should send Miss Benazir Bhutto back. That will fire up everybody."
"All right," I agreed. "But if it is politically correct for me to go, then we
should make a plan for all of us to go. Why don't we stagger our arrivals, one a
day for ten days or so, to build up to a crescendo?"
There was silence in the room. "Go back? I can't go back," one after
another protested, listing the charges, the prison sentences, the death sentences
that were pending against each of them in Pakistan. I was astounded. They were
perfectly willing to send me off, but were hardly sincere about mounting a
common offensive. "Either we do it properly or we don't do it at all," I said.
Silence.
All of us, however, were united in our gratification over Zia's setback in the
referendum. Victory rallies were held by the PPP all over the world on the Day of
Democracy, January 5, 1985, my father's birthday. Speaking in Sindhi, Urdu, and
English I led the meeting in London, where we had organized a seminar and a
mushaira, or poetry session. The atmosphere was electrifying, the crowds
packed into the rented hall. I ended my remarks with the verses of a
revolutionary poet. Waving their PPP banners, the entire audience joined in
crying out the refrain to each verse: " 'I am a rebel. I am a rebel. Do with me what
you will.'"
In the middle of the seminar I received a phone call from my mother.
Sanam had just had a baby girl. "At Simla, the words 'it's a girl' signaled bad
news," I announced joyfully to the assembled PPP supporters. "Today, they bring
the good news that my sister has given birth on Shaheed Bhutto's birthday. My
new niece's name is Azadeh, which in Persian means freedom." And the
cheering rose. The seminar was videotaped and dozens of copies were
smuggled into Pakistan.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

226

I was with my mother and Sanam myself three days later when Zia
announced that the elections for the National and Provincial Assemblies would
be held at the end of February. The issue of whether to boycott these elections
was more problematic than the referendum had been. Martial Law was still in
force and political parties were still banned. Our candidates would have to stand
as individuals, not as party representatives, for seats in the reactivated National
Assembly. Still, these were the first national elections Zia had held since the
coup in 1977. Should we participate?
"Boycott," the members of the PPP in London and Pakistan had argued in
anticipation of Zia's announcement. But I was torn. Never leave a field open, my
father had said over and over. I didn't know what to do, nor did I know what the
members of the MRD in Pakistan were planning to do. It was so frustrating sitting
in Europe while there was so much going on at home. And Zia, as usual, kept
changing the rules. On January 12th, he announced in a nationwide broadcast
that the leading members of the PPP and the MRD would be disqualified from
the elections altogether, thereby eliminating them as candidates. Three days
later he reversed himself and said most of them could participate after all. I
couldn't stand it.
"I think I should go back home," I told my mother while Sunny's baby cried
in the background. "I need to talk with the Central Executive Committee about the
elections. We need to decide whether a political win will be best achieved by
staying out—or going in."
I expected my mother to be against my decision to return. Who knew what
Zia would have in store for me? But she thought for a minute, then agreed with
me. "You're right," she said. "This is the time to talk the matter over with the party
leaders in Pakistan." Taking turns, my mother and I placed and replaced calls to
the party deputy in Pakistan, a process that took hours. We couldn't get through
to him. I did, however, get hold of my cousin Fakhri. "Tell the staff to open up 70
Clifton," I told her. "I'll be there in three or four days' time." I had just come back
from inquiring about flight schedules when the phone rang.
"70 Clifton is surrounded by the army," Dr. Niazi told me. "I've just heard
from Karachi that detention orders have been issued for you and your mother.
The airports have been cordoned off all over the country and every woman
arriving from London and France in a burqa is being searched.
There was no use going back if I was going to be immediately thrown into
detention and unable to take part in the discussions on whether or not to stand in
the elections. At least in Europe I could telephone. I continued to try to get
through to Pakistan. I had become convinced that we should mount an
opposition to Zia at the polls and wanted to represent that opinion in meetings
with the MRD.
"Is that Miss Benazir Bhutto speaking?" said the astonished voice in
Abbotabad when one of my calls finally got through.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

227

"Yes, yes, yes," I said impatiently. "Has the MRD taken a decision on the
elections?"
"Yes," he said.
"What is it?" I asked with baited breath.
"To boycott," he said.
If that was the consensus of the party and the combined opposition, so be
it. I returned to London and recorded another tape in Sindhi and Urdu calling for
the masses to boycott the polls. It, too, was smuggled into Pakistan, reproduced,
and distributed by the thousands in the interior of Sindh, Punjab, and other parts
of the country.
On February 25th I sat glued to the television in London for the coverage
of the voting for the National Assembly and, three days later, for the Provincial
Assemblies. Elections are normally boisterous affairs in Pakistan, conducted in a
carnival air. The streets throng with people, food peddlers pushing their carts
among them to sell cold drinks, ice lollies, sweetmeats, samosas, and pakoras.
People gather in huge crowds in front of the polling stations and jostle each other
for a turn to vote, Pakistanis never having bothered with orderly lines. But the
voters I saw on TV, probably government servants trotted out for the television
crews, stood at attention in pathetically thin lines, one behind the other, with no
food carts in sight.
The fact that Zia called it an election at all was an anathema. "In the
absence of political parties," Time magazine's Asia/Pacific edition reported,
"there were no campaign themes, no platforms, no debate about national issues.
Candidates were not permitted to hold outdoor meetings or rallies, to use
loudspeakers or microphones or to go on radio or television. The most the
regime allowed was for a candidate to go from house to house—and then he or
she was allowed to speak only to the number of people who could comfortably fit
into a single room. A few hopefuls tried to use mosques as a forum: they were
quickly disqualified."
The regime announced a turnout of 53 percent. We estimated it at
between 10 and 24 percent, depending on the region. The MRD's call for a
boycott had worked again, although not as successfully as it had with the
referendum. This time Zia had taken insurance against a successful boycott by
issuing a Martial Law regulation making a call for boycott punishable by rigorous
imprisonment. In the end, there weren't any political leaders around to even call
for a boycott. "In the final days before the election," Time reported, "the regime
rounded up an estimated 3,000 political opponents, including virtually every
major political figure in the country, and held them in jail or under house arrest
until after the balloting was over."
Even so, the voting was a resounding rejection of Martial Law and Zia's
policy of Islamization. Six of Zia's nine cabinet ministers who ran for the National
Assembly were defeated, as were many of his other associates. The candidates
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

228

backed by fundamentalist religious parties in the provincial elections also fared
badly, only six out of sixty-one candidates of the Jamaat-e-Islami winning seats.
In contrast, candidates who had claimed association with the PPP in spite of our
boycott did remarkably well, winning fifty out of fifty-two seats. "The PPP, which
is led by Bhutto's daughter Benazir, 31, now in exile in London, is still the
strongest party in the country despite its having been outlawed for nearly eight
years," Time said flatly.
Any hopes that Zia was truly moving toward a democracy were dashed
less than a week after the elections. Before the newly elected National Assembly
even met, Zia announced sweeping changes in the Constitution. His
amendments reconfirmed his presidency for five years, and gave him the
sweeping power not only to personally appoint his own prime minister, the chiefs
of the armed forces, and the four provincial governors, but to dismiss the
National and Provincial Assemblies at will.
What was different about his new government? Nothing. Though Zia was
ostensibly creating a "civilian" government under pressure from Western
governments, Martial Law was still in effect. Though he had given himself the
more acceptable title of "president," he was still chief Martial Law administrator
and chief of army staff, which ensured that the National Assembly stayed under
the thumb of the army. Zia would lift Martial Law, he said in an interview with
Time, "several months" after he assumed the presidency, and would resign at the
same time as army chief of staff. "When I am sworn in on March 23rd as
President, I think I should have a civilian exterior," he said, as if he could fool
people with a change of clothes. He couldn't. Martial Law would not be lifted for
another year. Zia remained army chief of staff. And dressing occasionally in a
long tunic instead of a uniform did not change his stripes.
On March 1st, four days after the elections, Ayaz Samoo was sentenced
to death.
On March 5th, Nasser Baloach was hanged.
We were all extremely sad when we heard the news of Nasser Baloach's
death. Zia had even turned a deaf ear to the petitions for clemency from nine of
the newly elected members of the National and Provincial Assemblies. Several of
the other political prisoners in Karachi Central Jail had managed to sneak out
last-minute mercy petitions for Nasser Baloach themselves, but Zia had
responded by transferring them to other jails. After our disclosure of the secret
documents, he had been compelled by international pressure to commute the
death sentences of the other three defendants. But Nasser Baloach was issued a
"black warrant." The labor leader had gone to the gallows, the Manchester
Guardian reported from Islamabad, "shouting anti-military slogans, including 'long
live Bhutto.'"
Sadly I went through the thick file of correspondence we had sent out and
received on Nasser Baloach's behalf, reading and rereading the note he had
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

229

written to me on the back of the foil from a cigarette pack and smuggled out of
his death cell in Karachi Central Jail. "May God give you and Begum Sahiba
health and long life so that the poor people of Pakistan can get guidance from
you," his note began. "We are passing our days with great bravery and courage
in our cells like Chairman Shaheed [Martyr] Bhutto, who did not bow his head in
front of the military junta. We will never beg for life from this military regime. . . .
We prefer the honor of the party to our own lives. We pray for your success. May
God help you."
I had prayed for Nasser Baloach for months. Now, with great pain, I
prayed for his soul in private and at the religious ceremony we held for him at the
home of one of the party leaders in exile. I felt I'd lost a brother. He had lived in
Malir, one of the most poverty-stricken areas in Karachi, where he and his wife
and children shared their small home with his parents and his brother and family.
Nasser Baloach was particularly proud of his daughters and talked about them
often. One had married while I was in sub-jail at 70 Clifton in 1983 and I had
helped as best I could by asking Fakhri to give the family some money to help
with the expenses of the wedding. As I sat down now to write his family a
condolence letter, I felt their anguish as my own. So reportedly did many other
people. Extra police, I read in the British papers, had to be called in to control the
crowds that gathered outside Karachi Central Jail the night of his hanging. When
the family took his body for burial, the crowds were so large the police had fired
tear gas to disperse the mourners. Zia's new civilian government had begun with
bloodstained hands. Would Ayaz Samoo be their next victim?
"I am writing to seek your help in saving the life of Ayaz Samoo, the labor
representative at Naya Daur Motors who has been sentenced to death by a
military court after an in camera trial on March 1, 1985," started a letter to those
on our mailing list signed by Dr. Niazi for the Human Rights Committee of the
Pakistan People's Party. "Dear Members/Officeholders," wrote Safdar Hamdani,
our exile coordinator who corresponded with overseas units and who lived in the
Central YMCA. "In light of the important details regarding the Ayaz Samoo case,
please redouble your efforts in: a) Meeting with your local MP/ Parliamentarian;
b) arranging delegations to meet their MP/Parliamentarians; c) getting signatures
on a Petition; d) contacting Human Rights Organizations; e) contacting the
press."
The details of the trumped-up case against Ayaz Samoo became clear
after a sympathizer in Pakistan smuggled out to us the police report on the case.
Samoo had been charged and sentenced to death for the murder of one Zahoor
ul-Hasan Bhopali, a supporter of the regime, in his offices in Karachi in 1982.
One assailant had been killed on the spot. According to the police report,
witnesses described the other as being between twenty-five and thirty, tall,
muscular, and of wheatish complexion. He had been bleeding heavily from a
shoulder wound, the witnesses reported, when he drove away from the scene in
a car.
Ayaz Samoo fit none of the descriptions. He was dark in color, slight, and
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

230

five foot four inches high. He was twenty-two years of age and had had no
wound when he was arrested. But the regime didn't bother itself with such
details. They were so eager to convict Bhopali's killer that not one but three
different military courts were trying or had tried three different defendants—and
found them all guilty of committing the same crime!
But we needed proof of Samoo's innocence. Real proof. It came on a
piece of cloth, smuggled out of Samoo's death cell by his lawyer. On it was a
sample of Samoo's blood. The police in Pakistan had made a big show of the
blood found in the getaway car, recovered after the murder. The blood in the car
had been typed by one Dr. Sherwani, and the result had been included in the
police report. Samoo's blood had never been tested to see whether it matched
that of the assailant. We found a pathologist in London to identify Samoo's blood
type. We had the proof, which we circulated among our mailing list: Sa-moo's
blood type was not the same as that found in the car. But the death sentence
was not lifted.
"My dear Sister," Ayaz Samoo wrote me from Karachi Central Jail on
March 23rd. "I am grateful that I have the opportunity to write to you. Our
determination is stronger than mountains and taller than the Himalayas.
Revolutionaries never, never yield to the dictators. Life is given by Allah, not Zia.
"I will prefer to be hanged than live under the oppressor. To give in is not
our principle. We are not ready to call a donkey a horse, or black, white, out of
fear of Martial Law. My dear sister, your brother, Ayaz Samoo, assures you that
the terrorist Zia ul-Haq can sever my neck, but he cannot bend it. . . . We the
martyrs will keep shedding our blood. One day the dawn will bring the news of
our blood to the people, Insha'allah. . . . We will live and live forever. Your
brother, Ayaz Samoo."
I took the information about Ayaz Samoo's case with me everywhere, back
to America in April, where I was invited to deliver the Rama Mehta Lecture at
Harvard, then to speak to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, then on
to Strasbourg in June, where I addressed the members of the European
Parliament. "Ayaz Samoo, a labor leader and supporter of the party, languishes
today in a death cell, accused of a crime he did not commit, uncertain of his fate,
knowing that his blood group does not even match the blood group of the
assailant in the incident of which he is accused," I said in a press conference in
Strasbourg. "When the conscience of the world is justly aroused against
apartheid and against human rights violations elsewhere, then that conscience
ought not to close its eyes to the murder by military courts which takes place in a
country which receives substantial aid from the West itself."
Just before I left for America in the spring of 1985, all fifty-four prisoners
held in Lahore because of their alleged involvement in Al-Zulfikar were
sentenced to life imprisonment, along with forty others in absentia, including my
brothers, Mir and Shah. Once again the regime was using the buzzword of
terrorism for its political ends. "Amnesty International has been concerned over
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

231

the years that the blanket charge of association with Al-Zulfikar may be used to
imprison some people involved in non-violent political dissent," Amnesty's 1985
report charged. Over seventy prisoners had been executed, more than a hundred
sentenced to death.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

232

Pakistan People's Party
111 Lauderdale Towers
Barbican
London E.C.2
June 18th
SAVE THE LIFE OF AYAZ SAMOO
Dear Member, you must act quickly and do your best to
save the life of this innocent 22-year-old son of Pakistan. . . .
Contact everyone on your lists. The mercy petition of Ayaz
Samoo is to be filed today. Please act fast as there is very little
time.
Letters were sent to Zia. Telegrams. Diplomatic pleas. Foreign pressure.
Ayaz Samoo was hanged on June 26, 1985.
Crash! What was going on in the kitchen? Someone must have left the
window open, I thought, going into my kitchen at the Barbican to pick up the
things knocked off the wall by the wind. Everything was in place. Could it be Ayaz
Samoo's spirit, I wondered. I said a prayer to bless his soul.
The next morning I was back at work with Nahid, Bashir Riaz, Safdar,
Sumblina, Yasmin, and Mrs. Niazi, writing letters to all the people who had taken
an interest in Ayaz Samoo's case and answering condolence letters from such
varied sources as Lord Avebury in the House of Lords, Elliott Abrams in the
United States, and Karel Van Miert in Brussels, who, along with the Socialist
Group of the European Parliament, was advancing a motion to cancel the
economic cooperation agreement about to be signed with Pakistan.
"I was very sad to learn of the execution of Mr. Ayaz Samoo, though not
altogether surprised," Lord Avebury had written. "It does show that Zia is
completely impervious to humanitarian appeals, and I'm afraid he knows that,
whatever he does, it will not affect the largesse from the U.S., or the Reagan
administration's determination to see Pakistan as part of the 'free world.' "
We were working quietly in our sadness when suddenly there was a loud
thud in the entranceway, where we had stacks of papers and files and manila
envelopes. Startled, we all looked up at each other.
"One of the files must have fallen off the table," Bashir said, going to the
entranceway.
"Nothing has fallen," I said, remembering the night before.
"You're right," he said, returning.
"Do you think it's Ayaz Samoo's soul?" I asked the others.
"Oh, God bless him," said Mrs. Niazi, who is a deeply religious person.
"We should have a Quran Khani for him here in the flat. It will give his soul
peace so he can rest."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

233

Nahid quickly organized a group of Pakistani women to come to the flat
that afternoon. We all read verses from the Holy Quran aloud, hour after hour,
until we had made several complete readings of the Holy Book. Ayaz Samoo's
spirit never caused a noise again.
I was supposed to leave for the south of France on July 1st to meet my
mother and the rest of the family on holiday. But one thing after another kept
interfering, political meetings, visits from PPP leaders coming in from Pakistan
who couldn't change their plans.
My mother called to tell me how sorry Shah Nawaz was that I was missing
the barbecue he had planned for me, as did Shah himself. We'd been together
only a few times since my release. I was looking forward very much to seeing
them all, Mir, Shah, their little girls, Fathi and Sassi, their Afghan wives, Fauzia
and Rehana. But it wasn't until the middle of the month that I was able to join
them.
On the morning of July 17th, I threw my clothes in a suitcase and rushed
for the airport. Ahead lay two weeks of much needed peace in Cannes after the
strain and tragedies of the last month. I couldn't wait. I had had enough of death.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

234

12
THE DEATH
OF MY BROTHER

Where were they? Had they forgotten to meet me? My eyes scanned the
busy Nice airport as I walked past immigration.
"Surprise!" Shah Nawaz said, leaping out from behind a column at the
airport. He embraced me, his eyes twinkling with mischief.
"It was his idea to hide." My mother came up, smiling as she kissed me.
Shah picked up my suitcase and immediately set it down with a mock
grimace. "Oof. What have you got in there? Gold?" We laughed as we walked
out of the airport. The fronds of the palm trees on the French Riviera moved lazily
in the slow wind. After the tension of the past few months, it was lovely seeing
the family again, and being with my mischievous kid brother, always full of
laughter and lightheartedness. He was my favorite among the children and we
had a special bond, he the youngest and I the eldest. I shook my head, smiling
as I caught the female glances and the turned heads looking at Shah. He was
slim and athletic and I could never walk with him without noticing the admiring
glances from passersby.
Shah and Mummy sat in the front seat of the car and I in the back while
we drove at speed into Cannes. Shah talked nonstop, looking as often at me
through the rearview mirror as at the road, his eyes sparkling under his long,
thick eyelashes, his hair glistening with golden highlights from waterskiing.
Dressed in a crisp white shirt and white trousers, he'd never looked more
handsome and fit.
I was relieved to see him looking so well. Shah had seemed very thin to
me during our four or five brief visits in the year and a half since I'd arrived in
England. For the first time I could see that he was putting on some weight, as
was I. He was no longer worried about my detentions in Pakistan, nor was I
especially worried about him or Mir. There had been no actions committed or
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

235

claimed by Al-Zulfikar for a long time and I felt there was no immediate danger to
the family. Zia was a long way away from the sun-washed beaches of Cannes,
where Shah was now living with his wife, Rehana, and our conversation in the
car was not about politics, but about mangoes.
"So what sort of mangoes did you bring us?" Shah said into the rearview
mirror. "We have been waiting for them for two weeks."
"Sindhris," I said, "though I prefer Chaucers. They're smaller and sweeter."
"A Sindhi who doesn't prefer Sindhris?" Shah said in mock horror. "Are
you sure you're from Sindh, madam? Do you often confess to such acts of high
treason?"
I laughed. Shah always made me laugh, made everyone in the family
laugh. My jet lag and general tiredness seemed to slip away. Shah's vitality and
zest for life were contagious. How did he do it?
He had been so young when the world of politics had engulfed us. When
he was born, Papa had just become a minister. My mother was busy
accompanying him on official events and my grandparents had died. No one, it
seemed, had been able to spoil Shah in the way the three of us had been. So
Shah developed a special attachment to me. He wrote me many letters at
Harvard in his childish scrawl. As he grew older, we would play squash together
in the summers. He was more fond of sports than studies. He was a key player
for his school basketball team and at home he lifted weights to build up his body.
But sports didn't equate with studies for my father.
Shah was packed off to a military cadet school, Hassan Abdal, to instill
some "discipline" in him. There, to the surprise of the other students who thought
the privileged son of the prime minister would be soft, he distinguished himself in
the physical fitness and "survival" courses. But he wasn't happy at Hassan Abdal
and soon cajoled Mummy into talking Papa into calling him back to the prime
minister's house and the International School at Islamabad.
Shah Nawaz. In Urdu, the King of Kindness. Shah was so generous you
never knew what he would do. In Paris a year earlier, on two occasions he had
got change to buy a Herald Tribune while I waited at a cafe. Both times he
returned empty-handed, having given the money to poor people holding hats in
the street. He literally gave away the shirt off his back. "Take it, take it," he would
insist if someone admired what he was wearing, once proffering the new blazer
Mummy had bought him. He had empathized with the poor since childhood. He
had built a straw hut in the garden at 70 Clifton and slept in it for weeks, wanting
to feel the deprivations of the poor.
He was the only one of us who didn't go to Harvard, but went instead to
the American College in Leysin, Switzerland. There he fell in love with a beautiful
Turkish girl and made lots of friends. Much to my father's consternation, his
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

236

grades didn't improve. As often as not he and his friends would drive down to
Paris for an evening at Régine's. In 1984, he insisted on taking Yasmin and me
to the famous night spot. Although seven years had passed, Shah was received
with recognition and gusto.
Yet, I always suspected he was the brightest of us all. He had the most
political exposure, my father having taken him to campaign meetings. He
addressed his first press conference at twelve. He had a sharp political sense, a
gut reaction to knowing what people were thinking, what they were feeling in their
hearts, what made their blood pound. A person is born with such a talent, be it for
music, ballet, or art. And he had it for politics. "Shah reminds me of myself when I
was young," my father often said to me.
This was our second family reunion in Cannes. "Do whatever you want
during the rest of the year, but for the month of July I want you all to be with me,"
Mummy had told all the children. The family holiday last year at Auntie Behjat's
house in Cannes had not been a great success. Our schedules conflicted and we
hadn't been able to spend too much time together. And Mir and I had argued
constantly about our differing approaches to unseating Zia.
"Zia has turned Pakistan into a state of armed terror," Mir had insisted.
"Only violence can answer violence."
"Violence only breeds violence," I had retorted. "That kind of struggle
cannot deliver anything lasting to the people. Any permanent change must come
peacefully and politically through elections, backed by the mandate of the
people."
"Elections? What elections? Zia will never give up. He will have to be
forced out by armed struggle," Mir countered.
"The army will always have more arms than any guerrilla forces," I argued.
"The state's capability will always be greater than any group of dissidents. Armed
struggle is not only impractical, but counterproductive."
Back and forth our argument raged, our voices rising until Shah slipped
away to go swimming, to go to a cafe, to go anywhere that we were not. "I can't
hack it when you guys argue like that," he told me. This year, to Shah's relief, Mir
and I had agreed to disagree and not to discuss politics at all.
Shah's interest in politics had expanded beyond Pakistan. Having lived in
several Middle Eastern countries since he was forced to leave Pakistan, he had
become interested in the complexities of the politics of Lebanon and Libya and
Syria. "You have a soft corner in your heart for Mrs. Thatcher," he often teased
me. "That's not true, Shah. She's right wing and I'm not," I'd protest, citing among
other things the high unemployment figures in Britain. He'd shake his head and
wave his finger at me. "No, I'm right," he'd say. "You're soft on her because she's
a woman."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

237

Circumstance, not choice, had thrown him into the dangerous, shadowed
world of Al-Zulfikar. In Kabul, it had been Shah's job to train volunteers in AlZulfikar's forces. Like everything Shah did, he approached his task with great
enthusiasm and mischief, once slipping through the midnight streets of Kabul
during the curfew imposed by the Soviets to join his "troops" for breakfast. Mir
had panicked in the morning when he discovered Shah was missing. "How else
can I teach the men evasionary tactics?" Shah faced the furious Mir with a smile
when he was found.
Shah, like the rest of us, had had his future derailed by the coup and the
assassination of our father. His longtime engagement to the Turkish girl had
been canceled by her family when they learned of his involvement in Al-Zulfikar.
He had had to postpone his dream of going into business as well, though
recently he had been talking about raising the capital to build blocks of flats in
France. "You and Mir can do the politics. I'll make the money for the family," he
had said during one of our get-togethers.
He was also interested in intelligence systems, and read extensively on
the subject. "When you and Mir are back in Pakistan doing politics, just
remember you have a little brother who can help you if you give him a high post
in intelligence," he told us. "Leaders cannot be accessible to all segments of
society, no matter how much they might want to be. Modern societies are too
large and complex. You'll need someone you can depend on to tell you what the
trends are, what the moods are, what's happening at the grassroots. So both of
you remember when the time comes, I'm here."
"How long are you in Cannes for?" Shah asked me now in the car.
"Until July thirtieth," I said.
"No, no, no!" he protested. "You must stay longer. Mir is leaving on the
thirtieth and I'm not going to let you go too. You have to stay with me for a week
at least."
"I have to go to Australia," I told him.
"You have to go nowhere," he said. "You're staying with me."
"All right, all right." I gave in.
I knew I couldn't stay. But I didn't want to dampen Shah's enthusiasm. Of
all the family, he had made the most effort to see me, even flying into Paris
unannounced in the spring of 1984, where I had gone on political work. "The
editor of the Red Star wants to interview you," read one message after another
from the receptionist at the hotel I was staying in. The Red Star? I'd never heard
of it, but then I got many requests from people and organizations I'd never heard
of. The third time the editor of the Red Star phoned, I took the call. "Heads of
state are easier to contact than you," Shah had laughed. "It's easier to get
through to Walid Jumblatt at Druze headquarters in Beruit than it is to get hold of
Ms. Benazir Bhutto."
Every morning in Paris, Shah called my hotel room at 6 A.M. "You're still
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

238

sleeping?" he'd say in mock amazement. "Get up. Let's have breakfast together."
Political dinners weren't a problem to Shah either. "What time will you be
through?" he'd asked me my first night in Paris, where I was meeting with Mr.
Naseem Ahmad, a former minister of information. At the appointed hour, I felt a
stir in the dining room and looked up to see a tall, good-looking man moving
gracefully toward us. My dinner partner blanched. Shah was not only the son of
the former prime minister, but a reputed terrorist. Lighting up a cigar, Shah soon
had Mr. Nasim Ahmad rocking with laughter at his stories. Later Yasmin, Shah,
and I walked the cobbled streets in the warm spring air, talking and drinking
coffee in cafes until 3 A.M.
"I'll pick you all up at seven P.M.," Shah now said, dropping Mummy and
me at the two-bedroom flat in Croisette she had rented for the month. "You'll
come see my new flat first, then we'll go for a barbecue on the beach. I've done
all the preparations. All you have to do is enjoy yourselves."
"Will Rehana be there?" I asked him.
"Yes," he said, his expression giving no clue to the current status of his
marriage. And he left to pick up last-minute items for our picnic.
Sanam, her husband, Nasser, their new baby, Azadeh, and I were all
staying with Mummy, along with a fifteen-year-old cousin from Los Angeles.
Eastern families like to live on top of each other, so the lack of space was no
problem. Mir, who was staying with his family at Shah's, joined us for a while with
Fathi. I had brought Fathi a little present of plastic cutouts and some books,
which I read to her during the afternoon. There was no air conditioning in the flat
and it was very hot, so the family gathered on the little balcony. Together we
passed a nice summer afternoon and looked forward to the evening, I barely
knew the Afghan sisters my brothers had married four years ago in Kabul.
Mir seemed very happy with Fauzia. But the same had not been true of
Shah and Rehana.
"If I tell you something, will you promise not to argue with me?" Shah had
asked me during our earlier visit in Paris.
"I'll try," I'd replied.
"I'm going to divorce my wife," he said.
My mouth dropped. "Don't be crazy, Gogi," I told him, calling him by his
family nickname. "You can't do that. There's never been a divorce in the family.
Your marriage wasn't even arranged, so you don't have the excuse of saying it
didn't work out. You chose to marry Rehana. You must live with it."
"You're more concerned about the appearance of divorce than you are
about me," he said, quite rightly.
"What's gone wrong?" I asked him, hoping I would be able to suggest a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

239

possible solution. But the stories he told me about his increasingly difficult
marriage made it seem irreparable.
Rehana had changed radically after their marriage, he told me. Whereas
at first she had been loving and attentive to him, preparing hot meals and a cool
drink for him when he came home exhausted from working with his troops, she
had suddenly refused to even bring him a cup of tea. Often he found her putting
on her makeup when he arrived home. Then she would go out and leave him
alone.
"I was so lonely," Shah confessed. "I had no home, no family. All I wanted
was someone to talk to, to watch television with. But she was rarely there. I
thought if we had a child, we would have a better life, but things just got worse."
Shah and Rehana had separated twice, Shah reconciling each time
because of their daughter, Sassi, and because he hoped Rehana would revert to
her original self. But in Paris he told me he wanted to end the marriage once and
for all. And like a fool, I talked him out of it.
"Perhaps she's just lonely and bored, Gogi," I told my brother. "Since your
marriage you've lived in one Arab country after another. She's lived in countries
where she had no friends or relatives, where she didn't understand the language,
where she couldn't understand the television, where there was no shopping, no
movies, no theater. She had no life. Add to that the emotional pressure of having
a child at a young age."
Shah seemed interested in my analysis of Rehana's problems. "She wants
me to do business in America and even claims she can get me off the American
blacklist," Shah said. "But the life of an American immigrant is not for me."
"What about a European residency until you can return to Pakistan?" I
pressed on. "Look, if the two of you were living in Europe, here in France, for
example, even if you weren't around Rehana could at least go out to a movie or
to see friends. This is not a conservative state where women are expected to
remain at home and are stared at in public. With Mir living in Switzerland now,
she'd be near her sister as well. If you put Rehana in the right circumstances,
maybe she'd come out of her depression and go back to being the wife she was.
If you like, I'll talk to some friends and see if I can get you French residency."
Shah had looked definitely interested at that point. "France is very
dangerous," he said. "If I live here I'll have to get a gun permit."
"I don't know about that," I told him. "But I could try."
His mood had improved considerably after our talk. But mine had
dampened somewhat when Shah took me with him to buy a bulletproof jacket. "I
need it to wear in Europe," he told me as he bought one for himself and a loose
one for me in a security shop. "You never know if Zia will be able to trace me."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

240

I tried to calm him because I myself was quite paranoid about safety. But
he was insistent. "I've got information that he wants to kill me," Shah said.
"But, Gogi, Al-Zulfikar has left Kabul and hasn't done anything for years
anyway," I argued. He just smiled at me. "I have my information," he said quietly.
When I was in jail in Sukkur, I had had a recurring fear for the lives of my
brothers. They were wanted men, and as such, I always lived in fear that
something might happen to them. The path of life they were treading was one in
which the ominousness of death was very much present and they had taken that
path out of free choice. But nonetheless, as a sister, I was very concerned.
Having lost my father, I was even more concerned about the safety of the others
who were near and dear to me. And the danger to my brothers was very real.
In Kabul, I had learned on a later visit with Mir and Shah, one of their
wives' old family retainers had tried to poison them. Fortunately for my brothers,
but unfortunately for their dog, the dog had eaten the food first, and died. The
servant had confessed to the crime, falling to his feet and begging their
forgiveness. "I was paid by the mujahideen—the Afghan rebels," he'd confessed.
"They wanted to please Zia." My brothers had spared his life when Mir's wife,
Fauzia, had intervened on the servant's behalf.
They had narrowly escaped another assassination attempt while sitting in
the front seat of a car. Shah had dropped something and both of them bent down
to retrieve it. In that instant, a bullet passed through the car right where their
heads would have been.
The target may well have been Shah, not Mir. While my brothers were still
in Kabul, a Pathan tribesman had come across from Pakistan to see Mir. "It is
Shah Nawaz's head that Zia wants first," the loyal Pathan had told him. "The
order is to kill Shah first, then Murtaza." There was truth to that, Mir explained to
me. "I'm more political, but it's Shah who spends all the time with guerrillas giving
them physical training. Shah who has the military expertise, Shah who is more of
an immediate threat."
"I hope to God you and Mir never fly near Pakistan," I said to Shah. "If the
plane were hijacked, Zia would get you." Shah had laughed. "You can't escape
death. If it is waiting for you, then no matter what you do, you can't escape it. But
Zia will never get us or any of the names he wants out of us. We carry vials of
poison with us wherever we go. I'll drink mine if Zia catches me. It works in
seconds. I prefer death to dishonor or betrayal."
The evening in Cannes was very pleasant, starting with our visit to Shah's
new flat up a long, hilly road in fashionable Californie, which he and Rehana had
moved into around six months before. He had been delighted when I succeeded
in getting him a residency permit. Reconciling with Rehana, they had traveled
around France and had explored settling in Monte Carlo before choosing
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

241

Cannes. With great pride now he took me on a tour of his flat, pointing out
Sassi's room with clown puppets on the wall and stuffed animals spilling out of
the bookcase, the dining area and living room which led to a terrace and,
beyond, the distant glint of the Mediterranean Sea. The flat was lovely, the whole
atmosphere like a movie still.
I greeted Rehana warmly, hoping on this trip to break through her reserve
and form some sort of relationship with her. As usual, she was dressed in the
latest fashions, though her clothes looked more suitable for a restaurant than a
beach picnic. But then our family had always preferred the comfort of informal
clothes. While Shah passed cold drinks to the family, I tried, unsuccessfully, to
talk to Rehana. Whether she was shy or simply uninterested, I don't know. But
soon she withdrew to join her sister at the far end of the room. They were
physically beautiful, the sisters, but I had no sense of what they were like
underneath.
I gave little Sassi her presents and played with her for a time while Shah
went into the kitchen to pack the hamper for the picnic. Auntie Behjat and Uncle
Karim joined us. I sat at Shah's desk, while my family swirled around the living
room. On the table were photographs of the family and of Sassi. A red leather
folder was neatly placed on the desk. A vase of fresh flowers sat on the glass
coffee table. I was pleased at how orderly Shah's life had become. "For the first
time, I feel on top of the world," Shah said to me, sitting down briefly on the edge
of the desk. "Everything is going very well for me."
"Catch me, Wadi. Catch me!" my two little nieces called to me on the
beach, running in and out of the edge of the sea. I ran after them, making a big
pretense of not being able to catch them. Shah finally got the charcoal going and
we were all very hungry by the time the chicken was cooked. "You get the first
piece," he said, bringing me what appeared to be half a chicken. "Oh Gogi, I
can't," I protested. "No, no, no," he insisted. "You must eat it all."
I looked around at the family, gossiping and laughing together. How many
years it had been since we'd had picnics on the beach outside Karachi, trying to
finish our food before the bold birds of prey swooped down and tried to steal it.
Who could have foretold that we'd ever be together at another picnic far away on
the beaches of the French Riviera. But the family reunion was going very well.
There was far less tension among us than there had been the summer before. I
looked for my sisters-in-law. Rehana and Fauzia were sitting apart, by
themselves. With Mir living in Switzerland and Shah in France, the sisters didn't
see each other that often and had as many memories to sift through as we did.
"Let's go to the casino," Uncle Karim suggested.
I was feeling tired, but Shah turned to me with an expectant smile. "We
can gup shup all night. You must come. Pinkie."
"Okay, I'll come," I told him. I couldn't refuse this brother of mine.
"Great. And don't forget about tomorrow," he said, reminding me of our
plan to go shopping for my birthday present of luggage from Mummy. "I'm the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

242

expert on Louis Vuitton. Tomorrow, whenever we wake up, I'll take you shopping
in Nice."
Plans. So many nice plans. Shah and Rehana left the beach for their flat
with the picnic hamper to unload. Sanam and Nasser caught a ride with Auntie
Behjat and Uncle Karim. Mir and Fauzia dropped off Mummy, my cousin, and me
at our flat before going back to Shah's to freshen up. "Shah and I will be back to
pick you up in half an hour," Mir called as he left.
He came back alone.
Instead of the cheerful Shah we had left at the beach, Mir told us, Shah
had looked very angry when he arrived at the flat. "I asked him what was going
on," Mir said. "But before Shah could answer, Rehana screamed at me: 'Get out!
Get out! This is my flat!' She was hysterical. 'Don't go,' Gogi said to me, but I
didn't want to stand between them. I thought maybe she'd calm down if Fauzia
and I packed up and left."
"Then where's Fauzia?" Mummy asked.
"She's downstairs in the car and very upset," Mir said. "She wants to go
home to Geneva right now. It's the middle of the night, I told her, and besides, my
sister has just arrived. She's demanding that we stay in a hotel but I told her no,
that I didn't see my family often and I wanted to stay with you all. But let's not ruin
the whole evening. Let's go out the way we planned."
"You all go," I told Sanam, Nasser, and Mir. "I've had a long day."
When they left, Fauzia came upstairs. She looked very strained and sat
alone on the balcony, smoking cigarette after cigarette. I felt sorry for her.
"What's the matter, Fauzia?" I asked her gently, joining her on the
balcony.
"Something terrible is going to happen tonight," she said, staring straight
ahead over the lights of Cannes. "Something terrible is going to happen."
I had no intuition of anything, no feeling at all.
"Don't be silly, Fauzia." I tried to soothe her. "Everything is all right."
But she persisted. "Something terrible is going to happen. . . . something
terrible is going to happen. . . ." I finally gave up and went to sleep, joining my
mother in the bedroom we were sharing.
"Read to me, Wadi, read to me," Fathi pestered me the next day. Sanam,
Nasser, and Mir hadn't come in until almost 6 A.M. and we had all slept late. I was
still lounging about in my nightclothes just after 1 P.M. when I heard the doorbell.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

243

"Wadi's got to get dressed now to go shopping," I said to Fathi, thinking
Shah had arrived to take me to Nice.
Instead Sanam rushed into the bedroom. "Quickly! We've got to go
quickly!" she said, handing me her baby while I stood there half-dressed.
"What's the matter?" I asked her.
"Rehana says Gogi's taken something," Sanam said, turning to rush back
out of the room.
My legs started to shake. I took a deep breath to give myself strength.
"Is he ill? Is it serious?" I called as she hurried down the hall. "We don't
know. We're going to see," she called back and was gone.
I stood there alone with Fathi and the baby.
The police. Get the police. Juggling the baby on my hip, I looked at the
emergency number on the phone. I dialed it and got a recording in French. I
grabbed the phone book to look up hospitals just as my mother and Sanam
rushed back in. Mir and Nasser had raced ahead with Rehana to Shah's flat.
Unable to get a cab on the streets, my mother and Sanam had come back to call
one.
"Mummy, you know French better than me. If we can't get the police, get a
hospital," I said to her rapidly.
"Why don't we just go there and see if he's all right," she said.
"No, Mummy, it's better to be safe. Remember Toni," I said, reminding her
of the case of a girl we knew who had taken an overdose of pills and had been
taken too late to the hospital to be saved. I had learned a similar lesson myself
when the police surrounded 70 Clifton. That was not the moment to ask why the
police had come. First burn all the papers. Then ask.
My mother took the telephone book. She tried one hospital. They told her
to call another. She called that hospital. Ring somebody else, they responded.
She was ringing a third hospital when Mir came in.
He looked broken, beaten. Silently saying what his voice could not, I saw
him mouth the words "he's dead."
"No!" I screamed. "No!"
The phone dropped from my mother's hand.
"It's true, Mummy," Mir whispered in agony. "I've seen dead men. Shah's
body is cold."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

244

My mother began to wail.
"Call an ambulance!" I said. "For God's sake, ring the hospital. He may still
be alive. He can be resuscitated!" I didn't know what to do with the baby in my
arms. Fathi was clinging to my leg, staring up at me.
My mother picked the phone up off the floor. The third hospital was still on
the line. "Just tell us where to go," the operator said, having heard our screams.
We ran out the door.
Shah Nawaz was lying on the carpet in the living room beside the coffee
table. He was still wearing the white trousers he had worn the night before. His
hand was outstretched, a beautiful brown hand. He looked like a sleeping
Adonis. "Gogi!" I shouted, trying to wake him up. But then I saw his nose. It was
white as chalk, standing out in sharp contrast to his tan.
"Give him oxygen!" I screamed at the ambulance crew, who were taking
his pulse. "Massage his heart!"
"He's dead," one of the crew said quietly.
"No! Try! Try!" I shouted.
"Pinkie, he's cold," Mir said. "He's been dead for hours."
I looked around the room. The coffee table was askew. A saucer of
brownish liquid sat on a side table. The cushion was half off the couch and the
vase of flowers had fallen. My eyes lifted to his desk. The leather file folder was
gone. I looked out on the terrace. His papers were there. The folder was open.
Something was terribly wrong. His body was cold. God knows how long
Shah had lain there, dying. But no one had been alerted. And someone had
taken the time to go through his papers.
I looked up to see Rehana. She hardly looked like someone who had just
lost a husband or who had rushed to get help. She was dressed immaculately,
her white linen jacket without a wrinkle, her hair all done up, not one strand out of
place. How many hours had she spent grooming herself while my brother lay
dead on the floor? She looked back at me with eyes that held no tears.
Her lips moved. I couldn't hear what she was saying.
"Poison," her sister Fauzia said for her. "He took poison."
I didn't believe her. None of us believed her. Why would Shah take
poison? He had been happier the night before than we'd ever seen him. He was
enthusiastic about his plans for the future, including a return to Afghanistan in
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

245

August. Was that it? Had Zia caught wind of Shah's plan and preempted it? Or
had the CIA killed him as a friendly gesture toward their favorite dictator?
"For God's sake, at least cover Shah's body," Sanam said. Someone
fetched a white piece of plastic.
"Wadi, Wadi, what's the matter?" little Fathi kept saying to me, pulling on
my shirt. "Nothing's the matter, darling," I absently soothed the three-year-old.
Sassi, too, looked upset and confused, wandering through the living room to sit
by her father's body. "Get the children out of here," my mother said. I took them
into Sassi's bedroom and left them with a book.
When the police came to take Shah's body away, Mir made me go into the
kitchen. "You don't want to see it," he said. I looked at the half-cut tomato and the
cooked egg still in the frying pan on the stove. Who had cooked it and for whom?
A bottle of milk stood on the counter. It was a very hot day and the milk had
curdled. Why had it been left out of the fridge? "They've taken Shah," Mir said,
returning to the kitchen. "The police said it looks like a heart attack."
He turned away, wiping the tears from his face. When he dropped the
tissue into the kitchen trash basket, he saw something shining. It was the empty
vial of poison.
The French authorities didn't release Shah's body for weeks. The wait was
agonizing for all of us crowded into my mother's flat. As Muslims, we bury our
dead within twenty-four hours, but Shah's body was undergoing test after test.
We didn't know what to do with ourselves. Alternately we cried or just sat and
stared. No one was interested in food or drink or anything. We had Sanam's
baby, Mir's daughter, and often Sassi, whom Fauzia would drop off every time
Rehana was called to the police station during the inquiry. "Take us to the
jhoolas," the little girls begged me and I would take them to the swings in a
nearby park. Sometimes Mir joined me. While the girls played, Mir and I sat on a
bench, staring silently out to sea.
My heart ached for Sassi. She had been very close to her father. Shah
was the one to get her up in the morning, to get her milk, to put her on the potty.
On some three-year-old level, Sassi knew she'd lost him. "My papa," she'd insist
when Mir came to pick up Fathi. When the car passed La Napoule, the beach
where we'd had the barbecue, Sassi would shout, "Papa Shah. Papa Shah." The
police had cut out the section of carpeting at Shah's house on which his body
was found. When Rehana had the carpeting replaced, Sassi pointed at the spot
where she'd last seen her father. "Papa Shah, Papa Shah," she kept repeating.
She took to clinging to us whenever Mir and I returned her to Fauzia. She didn't
want to go into the house and wound her arms tightly around our necks. "Go,
little baby," I'd whisper, while Fauzia pulled at her. But Sassi only clung harder.
We had to pry her hands apart to break her grip.
It was awful sitting in Cannes waiting for Shah's body to be released.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

246

Everything reminded me of him. I saw Shah everywhere, sitting at the Carlton
Hotel, walking on the Croisette. The pain of his loss was heightened by the
constant slandering of him in the Pakistani press. The regime-controlled papers
reported that Shah had been a depressive, a gambler, and suicidal. He had been
drunk the night he died, they claimed. Lab reports subsequently refuted the
claim, but our denial based on the reports received little play in the Pakistani
press. Now that Shah had lost his life, our enemies were doing everything they
could to destroy his honor. And the agonizing wait for my brother's body to be
released dragged on.
"I'm going to take Shah home to Pakistan to be buried," I said one
afternoon to the family.
My mother got hysterical. "Oh Pinkie, you can't go back," she cried. "I've
lost my son. I don't want to lose my daughter."
"Shah did everything for me, but he never asked me to do anything for
him," I said. "He longed to return to Larkana. Often he asked exactly where Papa
was buried so he could picture it. I have to take him home."
"Mir, tell her she can't go back," my mother begged my brother. What
could he do?
"If you go back, I'll go back too," he said, trying to frighten me into not
going because we all knew Zia was certain to kill him.
"You don't go. I'll go," Auntie Behjat said.
"I'll go," Sanam said.
"I'll go," Nasser said.
"Fine. We'll go together. But I'm going," I said. "I don't want Shah to have a
small and hidden burial. I want him to have all the respect and honor that he
deserves."
As the autopsy dragged on, I flew back to London for a few days to take
care of business at the Barbican. Hundreds of people came to call on me for
condolence at the party office. The grief for Shah was real and shared in the
Pakistani community, as was the widespread suspicion that Zia was somehow
involved in my brother's death. The grief in Pakistan, I was told by friends, was
even more widespread. Prayer meetings were being held all over the country for
Shah's soul, while thousands were coming to pray at 70 Clifton. Newspapers
carrying the false charges that Shah had died of alcohol and drug abuse were
being burned. In Sindh, most businesses had closed out of respect. Despite the
July heat, people had been flooding into Larkana for two weeks. Every hotel was
solidly booked and people were now camping at the railway station platform.
When I returned to Cannes, I had to control my own anguish sufficiently to
communicate with London and Karachi about the arrangements for our departure
after the autopsy was completed, as many Pakistanis wanted to accompany the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

247

family on Shah's final journey. To counter the confusion the controlled Pakistani
press was creating about both the release of Shah's body and the probable
timing of our return, I organized the release of regular bulletins to keep our
supporters informed.
There was no surcease to our sorrow. For no apparent reason, my
mother's car was broken into, the only one among many on the street. Only the
mail I had brought back with me and left briefly in the back seat was stolen. Our
apprehension heightened and we felt unsafe. There was a strong possibility, if
not probability, that Shah had been killed by agents of the regime. There was no
guarantee they had left Cannes. We communicated our concern and our need for
protection to the French government and they responded positively.
When Shah's body was finally released, we went to the funeral home to
say prayers over his body. I thought I'd see my little brother as I remembered
him, bronzed from the sun, slim and handsome in the white suit we had taken to
the funeral home because he was so fond of white. But the body lying in the
coffin was almost that of a stranger. Shah's face was powder white and puffy.
The morticians had had to chalk his face to cover the many incisions of the
autopsies. The sight was heartbreaking.
Oh, my poor Gogi. What have they done to you? The room filled with
wailing. Without knowing it, I started hitting myself in the face, sobbing in huge
silent gasps where the breath was caught in my chest. We were inconsolable
and had to be taken out of the room. Forcing some control over ourselves, we
walked to the car, where press photographers were waiting.
I took Shah home to Pakistan on August 21, 1985. The regime had
reluctantly agreed to allow his burial in Larkana, motivated perhaps by the
people's outrage that, contrary to Muslim ritual, neither my mother and I nor they
had been permitted to witness my father's burial. Yet the regime was once again
making every effort to keep the burial of another Bhutto quiet.
Fearing an emotional turnout by the people, the Martial Law authorities
made arrangements for us to fly Shah's body straight on from Karachi to
Moenjodaro, then to our family graveyard by helicopter, where they had already
built a helipad. The regime wanted Shah to be buried quickly and secretly, out of
the sight and minds of the people.
I refused. Shah had longed to return to the home of his birth for eight
years. I was determined to make his final journey as meaningful to him as it
would be to us, to pass him by the doorways that had sheltered him, 70 Clifton in
Karachi, Al-Murtaza in Larkana. I wanted to take him past the lands where he
had hunted with Papa and Mir, past our fields and ponds, past the people he had
tried to defend in his own way. The people, too, deserved the chance to honor
this brave son of Pakistan before he was laid to rest near his father in Garhi
Khuda Bakhsh.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

248

"Tell the Martial Law authorities that they can do whatever they want to
me, but I will not allow my brother to be denied the Muslim right of return to his
own home for his final bath by his own family and members of his household," I
told Dr. Ashraf Abbasi, who was coordinating the arrangements with the local
administration in Larkana. A compromise had been reached with the regime. We
were not to be permitted to take Shah home to 70 Clifton, but we could take him
to Al-Murtaza. Our home in Larkana was so remote and difficult to get to, the
local authorities noted in their reports, that the crowds would be sparse,
especially in the inferno of August.
To make sure, the army set up roadblocks on all the roads leading into the
province of Sindh. Buses, trucks, trains, and cars were stopped and searched.
The army was put on alert in Sindh and PPP leaders were detained under house
arrest. Karachi Airport was cordoned off and trucks filled with soldiers and
automatic weapons pulled across the main thoroughfares of the city. As further
insurance against any outburst, the regime tried to placate the people by finally
setting a date for the lifting of Martial Law. On the eve of my departure from
Zurich to Pakistan with my brother's body, Zia's appointed Prime Minister
Mohammed Khan Junejo announced that Martial law would be lifted in
December.
Black. Black armbands. Black shalwar khameez and dupattas. We
stopped briefly at Karachi and transferred from Singapore Airlines to a smaller
chartered Fokker for the final journey to Moenjodaro. As Shah's coffin, draped
with an outlawed PPP flag, was unloaded onto a trolley, several of our servants
who had come from 70 Clifton threw themselves on it, weeping. There was much
weeping, too, among the relatives who joined us in Karachi, as well as Paree,
Samiya, and her sister. And we flew on toward the most tumultuous funeral
Pakistan had ever witnessed.
"Let's go. Let's go. Let's go to Larkana. Don't you know they are bringing
Shah Nawaz today? Shah Nawaz, who is the son of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Shah
Nawaz, who is a warrior, Shah Nawaz, who has given his life for you and for me.
Come on, come on. Let us go. Let us go and receive a hero today." The beautiful
song written for my brother was being sung all over Pakistan. In spite of the
regime's threats, the people had been flooding toward Larkana for weeks,
camping in the fields, sleeping on footpaths.
Black. More black. As the Fokker came in to land soon after 10 AM. at
Moenjodaro, there was a mass of black ringing the airport, lining the roads for
miles. The regime's roadblocks could not stop the mourners who had traveled
through the searing heat to express their grief for this fallen son of the land. Even
where there is enmity, it is incumbent on Muslims to express sorrow at death and
to take part in the grief. But no one had anticipated these multitudes. The press
reported the crowds at well over a million.
"Allahu Akbar! God is Great!" the people shouted as Shah's coffin was
placed in a waiting ambulance and packed with the ice I'd asked for. After all the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

249

postmortems and autopsies he'd been through, I didn't want anything else to
happen to him. "Inna li Allah, wa inna ilayhi raji'un. To God we belong and to Him
we must return," the people chanted as the ambulance passed, holding their
arms out and their palms up in their recitation of the Muslim prayer for the dead.
I don't think many presidents of nations have been given such an
honorable and magnificent farewell as Shah was receiving at the age of twentyseven. Two thousand vehicles of every sort, cars, motorcycles, trucks, and
animal-drawn carts draped in black, followed his coffin, a motorcade stretching
ten miles. The people showered the ambulance bearing his body with rose petals
in the loving gesture of farewell all along the eighteen miles from the airport to
Larkana. As his coffin passed, many men in the crowd saluted, their heads
topped with embroidered caps or wrapped in the turbans of their tribes.
Pictures of Shah rimmed in black. Shah Nawaz Shaheed. Shah Nawaz
the Martyr. There were pictures of me, of my mother, one unforgettable one of
Shah silhouetted against Papa. Shaheed ka beta Shaheed, the legend read—
The Martyr's Son Has Been Martyred. The pent-up grief the people had not been
allowed to express for my father, for their own suffering, and for ours welled over.
Wailing and striking their breasts, the grieving masses threw themselves at our
motorcade, rocking the cars in their frenzy to touch the vehicle bearing Shah in
the gesture of farewell.
The sun was high in the sky and there was still much to be done before
the afternoon prayers: the ritual washing of the body; the viewing of the face by
the family; the prayers for the dead read at home by women, who do not
accompany the body to the graveyard; the prayer service for men, which had
been organized on a nearby football field. Shah had to be buried before
sundown. And Sanam and I had still to pick out his gravesite. We hadn't been
able to do that for my father. This time I wanted to be able to plan the space, to
place Shah far enough away from my father so there would be room later to build
mausoleums for both of them. As we neared Al-Murtaza, however, the crowds
became a solid wall.
"Go straight on to Garhi," I told the driver of our car. Somehow he got us
out of the crush as the ambulance bearing Shah's body pulled into the courtyard
of Al-Murtaza. The crowds were only slightly less dense at our family graveyard
fifteen miles away, but they stayed outside the walls. Together Sanam and I
chose a site in the far left-hand corner of the graveyard, quite a distance away
from my father, who is buried behind my grandfather. After saying a brief prayer
at my father's grave, we hurried back to Al-Murtaza.
Crying. Wailing. In the fever of their grief, the people had broken down the
walls of Al-Murtaza and flooded not only into the courtyard but into the house.
The house was packed not only with them but with our most distant female
relatives, with women party workers, with the household staff. Shah's coffin was
in the drawing room still unopened because of the pandemonium. "Please give
us room," I beseeched the people with folded hands as they pushed over each
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

250

other. All discipline had simply been overwhelmed.
I had wanted to show Shah's face to the relatives, but when the staff
started to move the coffin toward my grandfather's room, where the maulvi was
waiting to bathe the body, emotions reached fever pitch. The women, even the
household staff, became overpowered with grief and started hitting their heads
on the coffin. Blood started to flow from men's heads, women's heads. "For
God's sake, move them all away before they harm themselves any more," I cried.
"Move Shah quickly into my grandfather's room."
Finally, quietly and tenderly, Shah was bathed by our maulvi and the
household staff, and placed in a kaffan, the unstitched Muslim burial shroud. The
heat was suffocating, well over 110 degrees, and I was increasingly anxious to
get on with the burial. "Oh baba, he had cuts all over his body," one of the
shocked staff said, returning from the washing. "Don't tell me," I said to him. But
he couldn't stop. "His nose was cut, his chin, his—" "Stop!" I shouted. "Enough.
He is now home, back where he belongs." My brother-in-law, Nasser Hussein,
came up to me. "It's getting late," he said. "We must hurry." Given the crowd, we
decided it was best to take Shah to the graveyard in the strong wooden coffin
rather than carrying him in the kaffan.
I asked the servants to bring Shah's body back into the drawing room so
the relatives could pray. Then, suddenly, Shah's coffin was being carried through
the heaving crowd to the ambulance. Nasser Hussein hurried behind. In the
chaos, I almost missed the departure myself. Hearing the chant of prayers, I ran
to follow the coffin to the door.
Goodbye, Shah Nawaz. Goodbye. The parting was so quick, so painful.
As the ambulance started, I wanted to run out, to stop it, to bring Shah back
somehow. I didn't want to let my little brother go. Oh, Gogi. Stay with me. A
single moan rose from the five hundred women praying in the garden as the
ambulance moved through the gates and out of sight. My brother was gone
forever.
In every generation, Shiite Muslims believe, there is a Karbala, a
reenactment of the tragedy that befell the family of the Prophet Mohammed,
PBUH, after his death in A.D. 640.
Many in Pakistan have come to believe that the victimization of the Bhutto
family and our supporters was the Karbala of our generation. The father was not
spared. The mother was not spared. The brothers were not spared. The daughter
was not spared. The band of followers was not spared. Yet, like the followers of
the Prophet's grandson, our resolve never faltered.
As I lingered in the doorway of Al-Murtaza, a woman's voice rose above
the moans in the courtyard, reenacting the tragedy at Karbala. "See, see
Benazir," the woman keened in the cadence of the subcontinent. "She has come
with the body of her brother. How young he is, how handsome, how innocent. He
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

251

has been slain by the tyrant's hand. Feel the grief of the sister. Remember
Zeinab, going to the court of Yazid. Remember Zeinab as she sees Yazid playing
with her brother's head.
"Think of the heart of Begum Bhutto, how it bursts as she sees the child
she gave birth to, who she played with as a baby. He grew before her eyes.
Nusrat sees his first steps. The mother that made him grow with such love. Think
of her.
"Think of Murtaza. He has lost his right hand. He has lost half of himself.
He will never be the same. . . ."
Cries echoed off the walls of Al-Murtaza as the women wailed and beat
their chests. "A-i-i-e-e-e!" It was a massive, heaving cry of farewell. I slowly
backed into the house. My brother was being buried in the graveyard of our
ancestors. I could do no more.
Nasser Hussein, Garhi Khuda Bakhsh:
When we arrived at the Bhutto family graveyard from the prayer
service, the crowd was impenetrable. As the coffin came out of the
ambulance, I shouldered the front corner. I have no idea who was behind
me or what happened to them. I just clung to my position as the crowd
pushed forward to try to carry the coffin even for a moment, to relieve our
burden and share in the task.
There was no one to guide us toward the gravesite and we couldn't
see where we were going. The coffin seemed twice as heavy because we
couldn't coordinate our actions. It rocked like a rudderless ship on our
shoulders as the sea of bodies pushed and shoved. Where our feet
ended, somebody else's began. Our progress was so circuitous, it took us
forty-five minutes, maybe longer, to blindly move the ten yards from the
ambulance to the entrance of the graveyard.
Suddenly, an upturned, beckoning hand came out of the crowd in front
of me. I caught a glimpse of the son of one of the staff at Al-Murtaza, and I
followed his hand while he backed toward the gravesite. The crowd helped
by pushing the coffin in his direction. I willed myself not to faint in the heat
and hysteria. Yet, miraculously in all the crush, no one trod on the other
Bhutto graves.
When we reached Shah's grave, I collapsed, my legs in the excavation.
A villager brought me water in a rusty cup and I gulped it down. There was no
room to take Shah's body out of the coffin. We had to tilt the coffin and slide
the body into the grave. The people were calling out to be shown Shah's face
in the last viewing, but Benazir had asked me not to. The last quick prayer
was said, and the mourners joined in the Fateha, the hand-raising act of
prayer and submission. The elders were coming forward for the long recital of
twenty-four prayers when I left. My sad duty was over. We had brought Shah
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

252

Nawaz to his final resting place.
I was arrested by the Martial Law regime five days later in Karachi. I was
not surprised. Though Zia had given assurances to the press that I would not be
arrested on my return with Shah's body and the chief minister of Sindh had also
issued a statement saying that I would be free to come and go, the masses of
mourners who had swept by the army's barricades in Larkana to express
solidarity with the family had badly shaken the regime. As the mourners
continued to mass in the fields across from Al-Murtaza and in the street outside
the house for the other religious rites surrounding death, the regime, I'm sure,
feared an uprising.
Though my brother's death had forced them to announce the date for the
ending of Martial Law, neither his death nor the suffering of thousands of others
had been avenged. "We should take the initiative now when emotions are
running so high to oust Zia," several PPP leaders suggested at an evening
meeting after Shah's burial. Others argued that we should not give the regime the
pretext for not lifting Martial Law. Even in grief, it seemed, politics did not go to
one side. "Martial Law is the curse of the country and we must ensure that it is
lifted," I argued wearily in favor of restraint. "Shah has given his life for it. If we
mount an agitation now, then they can say that they wanted to lift Martial Law,
but were forced not to. We must consider this aspect."
Nonetheless, I took precautions against repercussions from the regime.
The soyem ceremony for the dead is held on the third day following burial, the
chehlum forty days afterward. I was not at all sure I'd be free in forty days, so
after great debate with religious leaders, we decided to count the forty days from
the time of Shah's death in July in France rather than from his August burial. That
way, the soyem and the chehlum almost coincided.
Another Bhutto grave. Another mound of fresh mud. I took flowers with me
to add to the masses already on Shah's grave. "In the name of God, most
gracious, most merciful," I prayed along with hundreds of others crowded into the
sweltering graveyard. It was heartrending to see all that fresh mud. Shah Nawaz.
Sanam had to go back to Karachi the night after the soyem. So did Fakhri.
I didn't want to be alone in my grief at Al-Murtaza and decided to go with them. It
was some sort of consolation that at least Sanam and I were together, a little
something of the family. But once more politics overrode our personal mourning.
Thousands greeted me at Karachi Airport. We couldn't get through the
crowds to reach the car. Members of the party finally forced a passageway of
sorts, linking their arms around us to make a flying wedge. It took several hours
for the car to make its way through the people to 70 Clifton, jeeps and
motorcycles accompanying us making the victory sign but not shouting political
slogans. Slogans are a sign of happiness and everyone was in mourning for
Shah.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

253

The garden at 70 Clifton was just as packed. I walked out to thank the
people for taking part in our grief and for showing their solidarity. Many faces
were familiar, men and women who had been to jail several times for their
political beliefs. "Whether we agreed with my brother's methods or not, he was a
man who opposed tyranny," I said to them. "His conscience did not allow him to
keep silent at a time when Pakistan was suffering."
Nasser Baloach. Ayaz Samoo. Two other young men who had given their
lives for the cause of democracy and were victims of military terror. They, too,
had been my brothers, rallying round me, protecting me, thinking of me as their
sister. The next day I contacted their families. Just as mourners were pouring into
70 Clifton to condole with us, I wanted to pay condolence calls to their families, to
share the grief of other mothers and sisters who had lost their brothers. I never
got there.
The police surrounded 70 Clifton in the early hours of August 27th. Once
more 70 Clifton was declared a sub-jail and guarded by police and army units
armed with tear gas. I was served with a ninety-day detention order, the regime
later claiming that I had ignored their warnings not to visit "terrorists" in "sensitive
areas." I had received no such warnings. The areas deemed "sensitive" by the
regime were Malir and Lyari, impoverished areas of Karachi, whose inhabitants,
including the families of Nasser Baloach and Ayaz Samoo, had suffered the most
under Zia. No wonder he considered the areas "sensitive." And Zia was no one
to use the excuse of terrorism. If terrorism is denned as the use of force by a
minority to impose its views on the majority, then Zia and his army had defined
themselves.
In Washington, the Reagan administration expressed "dismay" over my
detention. "Pakistan has taken encouraging steps toward the restoration of
constitutional government. . . . putting Ms. Bhutto under house arrest would
appear to be inconsistent with this process," a State Department spokesman was
quoted as saying. The reaction from British parliamentarians was stronger, both
MP Max Madden and Lord Avebury contacting Zia on my behalf. But I remained
locked up, once more without a phone or any contact with the outside world.
Sanam and Nasser were with me for the first few days, as was my cousin Laleh,
who had been sleeping over and had been inadvertently caught in the regime's
net. But on September 2nd, the regime forced my family to leave and I was left at
70 Clifton, utterly alone in my grief.
Politics. Politics. Politics. The mantle of leadership felt heavy during the
days, then weeks of solitude. How often politics had kept me from my family,
especially Shah Nawaz, now lying under the dust of Larkana. "Make time to see
me. Why can't you make time?" He had phoned me in London time and again,
only to mimic my inevitable reply. "Oh Gogi, I have to go to America, to Denmark.
I have important meetings in Bradford, Birmingham, Glasgow. . . ." If I had just
paused, thought, given him more time. But then, no one can change destiny. His
fate had been written. Still, it was very hard for me to accept that he was gone.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

254

His room in the annex across the courtyard was just the way he'd left it
eight years ago, his yearbook from his high school in Islamabad still on the
bookshelf next to the adventure novels he had loved and the Holy Quran my
father had given him. Mir's room was the same as well, his poster of Che
Guevara on the wall and his Harvard yearbook in the desk drawer. My brothers'
rooms were locked now, as were the rooms of my sister and mother and father.
The only light in the house in the few hours the electricity was uninterrupted by
the regime was in my room, one room in a whole, huge house.
I yearned to see Sassi, to bring Shah's daughter to see her family home
and learn her heritage. She should never forget her father, but be taught what he
stood for and what he had given for his country. Her heritage was a proud one,
interrupted by tragedy. Perhaps it was all preordained. "Why does Shah want to
call her Sassi?" Dr. Abbasi had asked me one day as we drove together to
Hyderabad. "It's such a sad name. You remember the legend of Sassi who fell in
love with Pannu, but they were separated. Sassi walked across deserts and
mountains in search of him. 'Sassi, Sassi,' she heard Pannu call to her from one
spot in the desert. But when she reached it, the earth opened, swallowing her
up." But Shah loved the name Sassi as much as he loved his daughter and the
name stuck.
Would we ever know who was behind Shah's murder? Locked up at 70
Clifton, I kept coming back to the story Samiya had told me on the flight with
Shah's body to Moenjodaro. A man had visited several newspaper offices in
Karachi the month before the murder, she told me, asking for current pictures of
Shah. Had someone been looking for a picture to identify Shah as he looked at
twenty-seven?
I was listening to the early morning BBC report on October 22nd when my
body went rigid. The police had arrested Rehana in Cannes, the broadcaster
said, and charged her under French law for "failing to assist a person in danger."
There were no details.
A few days after I heard the announcement about Rehana on the BBC, I
read in the local newspapers that I had received a summons to attend the inquiry
into Shah's death, but had responded that I did not want to go. What summons? I
had never received a summons. "It's not true that I do not want to attend the
inquiry," I wrote in a letter to the home department. "I do want to attend, but it is
in your hands, not mine. Please advise the French court that I wish to attend, but
that you are preventing me."
I was released on November 3rd. "Today I begin a difficult journey, a sad
journey which will take me into the courtrooms of a foreign land to inquire into the
death of my beloved brother, Shah Nawaz," I began a statement to our
supporters. I had to type it on a manual typewriter. This time the regime had
turned off all the electricity to 70 Clifton, as well as the separate electrical system
in the annex. "I am determined to return as soon as possible," I concluded the
statement. "God willing, I hope to be back in three months . . . no matter what the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

255

consequences."
The air was light in France when I arrived to give my deposition, but my
heart was heavy. It was to get heavier as I learned the details of Shah's death
and Rehana's arrest.
Rehana had gone to the police station to pick up her passport on October
22nd, her passport having been confiscated by the French police shortly after
Shah's death. After months of inconclusive questioning, during which Rehana
had repeated her claims to both Interpol and French police that Shah had
committed suicide and that she had neither seen nor heard anything while my
brother was dying, her lawyer had argued successfully that her passport be
returned. Rehana had been all set to leave France when she called at the police
station. Instead, she had dropped a bombshell.
Rehana had inadvertently confirmed what so far only the police knew—
that Shah had not died instantaneously. The police had questioned her further,
charged her with failing to assist a person in danger, and produced her before a
magistrate. Instead of receiving her passport, Rehana had received an arrest
warrant and had been sent to Nice Central Jail.
The family was devastated at the disclosure about Shah's death. The
poison which both my brothers carried, Shah had told me, worked
instantaneously. Mir's vial of poison had been examined by both the French and
Swiss police, confirming Shah's claim—if taken undiluted, the poison worked
immediately. That Shah had died quickly and painlessly had been a source of
comfort to all of us. Our grief deepened greatly with the news that he had not.
For a week, I had nightmares. "Help me!" Shah called to me. "Help me!" In
other dreams, he was shivering with cold and I would try to bring him blankets.
During the day, I ran frequently to the bathroom to throw up. The unanswered
questions surrounding Shah's horrible death plagued us. Why hadn't Rehana
gone for help? And why was she continuing to claim that Shah had committed
suicide, a particularly painful accusation for Muslims, who believe that God alone
should give and take life? We knew Shah's strength and joie de vivre. He would
never have committed suicide. And no one would voluntarily have chosen the
prolonged, painful death he had apparently experienced.
We were convinced as a family that Shah had been killed and filed
charges of murder against unknown persons. At the Carlton, I met unofficially
with one of the police officers investigating the case. The police, too, were
stymied. "Can you find out more about the poison?" he asked me. "There wasn't
a trace of it left in the body." I followed up every lead I had, finally obtaining the
details of the poison on the basis of confidentiality. The description still haunts
me.
"The poison works instantaneously if taken undiluted," the report stated. "If
diluted, its nature changes completely. After thirty minutes the victim loses
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

256

stability and is afflicted with a headache, a feeling of exhaustion, and severe
thirst. Within an hour the body starts shaking uncontrollably, accompanied by
pain around the heart and stomach, and cramps throughout the body. Rigor
mortis sets in before death, leaving the victim conscious during the onset of
paralysis. Phlegm fills the throat, making breathing labored and speech difficult.
Still conscious, the victim feels cold. The time of death varies, between four and
sixteen hours."
The tragedy of Shah's death spread throughout the whole family, starting
with the breakup of Mir's marriage to Fauzia. Sassi, too, was lost to us. When I
arrived in Nice for the deposition, Sassi was with Fauzia, who refused to let us
have access to her. Our pain seemed unending. Sassi was our blood. Sassi was
our flesh. She looked just like Shah, especially her eyes. Sassi was all we had
left of him. And we were losing her.
We had tried to work out a legal family settlement before with Rehana:
Sassi would live with her nine months a year and with us three months while we
paid for all her expenses and education. But Rehana hadn't been interested. We
were forced to turn once again to the court, though the legal proceedings did
nothing to relieve our feeling of loss.
In February 1988, the court awarded my mother the right to see Sassi on
weekends, but the judgment could not be implemented. Rehana had evidently
sent Sassi to America to stay with her grandparents. Who knows where she is
now or how she is. I get a physical pain in my heart when I think of her. If only we
could be assured that she is all right, that she is healthy, that she is happy. But
we are told nothing. In the meantime, I cling to the dream that someday Sassi will
come to us. Like her namesake, she will cross the deserts and the mountains to
find the family who loves her. We will wait for her always.
In June 1988, after more than two years of legal proceedings, the French
court ruled that Rehana would have to stand trial on the charge of failing to assist
a person in danger, a charge punishable by one to five years in prison. To our
disappointment, the court also ruled that there was insufficient evidence to
uphold our charge of murder by unknown persons. But the stigma of suicide, at
least, was removed from Shah's name. Shortly after the court's decision, the
BBC reported Rehana's lawyer as saying that Rehana, too, now accepted that
Shah had been murdered.
Sassi, like the rest of us, may never learn the truth of how her father died.
In July 1988 we learned that Rehana had left France to join her family and Sassi
in America. The French authorities, it turned out, had returned Rehana's passport
to her for "humanitarian reasons." It seemed that Rehana had no difficulty, our
lawyers told us, obtaining a visa from the American consulate in Marseilles. Her
trial, we are advised, will not take place before 1989, if it takes place at all. In any
case, our lawyers doubt that Rehana will return to France to be present at the
proceedings.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

257

Another Bhutto dead for his political beliefs. Another activist silenced. We
go on, of course. Grief will not drive us from the political field or from our pursuit
of democracy. We believe in God and leave justice to Him.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

258

13
RETUR TO LAHORE
A D THE
AUGUST 1986 MASSACRE

Martial Law was lifted on December 30, 1985. I was still in Europe and
saw the news on a hotel wire service. But what should have been a moment of
great relief was not. The ending of Martial Law was nothing more than a publicity
stunt for the West. It was not a return to true civilian rule, for Zia still retained the
office of both army chief of staff and president, making it impossible to say that
the army had disengaged itself from the political process. The role political
parties could play in elections was left unresolved, underscoring the regime's fear
of returning Pakistan to a true democracy.
Zia's new "civilian government" was in fact a charade. Shortly before the
lifting of Martial Law, Zia's puppet Parliament had rubber-stamped the
scandalous Eighth Amendment Act which indemnified members of the regime
not only for their past actions under Martial Law, but also for any actions taken in
the three remaining months of Martial Law. Thus guaranteed that no judicial
review could take place to determine the fairness of their actions, the military
courts had rushed to sentence hundreds of people to long terms in prison so that
as many political dissidents as possible would be safely behind bars —and
remain there—when Martial Law was lifted.
The end of Martial Law did nothing to erase its legacy. Since 1977, Zia
had been systematically destroying the institutions my father's government had
installed—an independent judiciary, a structured economy, a parliamentary form
of government, a free press, religious freedom, the guarantee of civil rights to all
under the Constitution of 1973. Because of the lack of any legal order and the
sense of impermanence in everything, life in Pakistan had become a free-for-all.
Bribery and crime had become nationwide industries. Under Martial Law,
the most-sought-after jobs among the brightest young people were in customs,
because the payoffs were highest. A new class of "entrepreneurs" was—and is—
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

259

smuggling in everything from air conditioners to video equipment, paying their
way through customs, and then selling the items on the black market. A recent
report from the State Bank revealed that nearly one-sixth of Pakistan's economic
growth is due to smuggling. The country receives no tax revenues from the black
economy.
The Soviet move into Afghanistan had cast an even longer and more
ominous shadow. U.S. arms destined for the mujahideen ended up in new and
flourishing Pakistani arms markets. Kalashnikov automatic rifles from the Soviets
found their way into the hands of Pakistani craftsmen who copied them and sold
them for as little as $40 on the black market. It was said that one could even rent
a Kalashnikov by the hour in Karachi. In parts of interior Sindh people no longer
traveled after dark, when the roads were taken over by gangs of bandits armed
with automatic weapons and rocket launchers. Many large landowners and
industrialists all over Pakistan began to maintain private armies to protect
themselves, and to launch attacks on their competitors. At times the regime
raised these armies, too, providing arms, uniforms, and salaries to "soldiers"
recruited for them by tribal lords. In return, these forces intimidated PPP
supporters, sometimes razing entire villages. Not even the mosques where the
villagers took refuge were spared.
Drug trafficking had also become a by-product of the invasion of
Afghanistan. Whereas Pakistan had been drug free before the buildup of Afghan
refugees, now more than a million Pakistanis were thought to be addicted, while
millions if not billions of dollars' worth of heroin and opium rumbled down the
roads from the refugee camps in the north to be shipped out of Karachi in the
south. By 1983, Pakistan had become the major supplier of heroin to the rest of
the world. Gaudy, huge mansions paid for with drug money sprang up in Karachi,
Lahore, and the tribal territories. Again the regime looked aside or took its cut.
Many of the shipments, it was said, were transported to Karachi in the army
trucks which had gone to the Khyber Pass filled with weapons for the
mujahideen.
Relatives of high-ranking regime officials, including the son of a military
cabinet minister, were intercepted and arrested for drug trafficking by Interpol in
America and other Western countries. But in Pakistan, not one major government
figure was arrested. Though he denies it, it was widely rumored that the kingpin
of the drug trade was the military governor of the Frontier Province, who retained
his position for more than seven years while Zia removed and replaced the other
military governors at will. Almost as notorious was the case of Abdullah Bhatti,
one of the two drug bosses the regime arrested in eight years of Martial Law.
After being sentenced by a military court, Bhatti "escaped." Several years later,
when bad weather caused his plane to divert to Karachi, Bhatti was rearrested.
General Zia used powers of presidential pardon to set him free, a power he had
never used for any political prisoner.
Zia's policies of "Islamization" had also divided and demoralized the
country. Whereas under my father there had been religious tolerance, under Zia's
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

260

"Islamization" there was persecution of all our religious minorities. Most
Pakistanis followed the Hanafi school of Sunni Islam, a moderate interpretation of
our religious beliefs. Our country had been founded on the Islamic principles of
unity, mutual support, and tolerance for our religious minorities: the Ahmadis who
had their own religious leadership in England, the Hindus, the Christians, and a
small but united population of Parsis, Zoroastrians who worshiped fire. "You are
free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other
places of worship in this state of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or
caste or creed—that has nothing to do with the business of the state," the
founder of our country, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, had declared on the day he was
elected president of the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan in 1947.
Zia, however, was backing the Wahabbis, a sect close to the reformists in
Saudi Arabia who formed the right-wing groups like the Jamaat-e-Islami and
believed in a much harsher, less tolerant interpretation of Islam. From the
moment of the coup in 1977, the regime had preached "Islamization" while the
fundamentalists had tried to impose their bigoted minority views on the rest of the
country. Christians, Hindus, and Parsis woke up to find mimeographed letters
slipped under their doors: "Get out. We don't need you here." Very quietly, many
minorities had sold their holdings and left the country which had been their home
for generations. Those who had stayed behind had adopted a lower profile, the
Parsi women who in my father's time often wore jeans, for example, adopting the
shalwar khameez out of fear of drawing the wrath of fundamentalist mullahs.
Under Zia, the mullahs became the sword of Islamization. They provided
his repressive rule with the cover of Islam to make it palatable, and he in turn
introduced an Islamic tax—2.5 percent of all income—which he distributed
through them. Far more of Zia's tax went into the mullahs' pockets than into the
hands of the needy for whom it was supposedly collected.
The fatwa, or judgment as to what was right and what was wrong
proclaimed by the mullahs in their Friday sermons at the mosques, took on deep
significance. One almost comical fatwa in 1984 concerned the actors in a
television film who, in real life, were married to each other. In the film the male
character repudiated his "wife," saying "I divorce you" three times. The resulting
fatwa from the mullahs declared that the married couple was now not only
divorced, but that the wife was subject to rajm, the practice of stoning a woman
to death for adultery. A mob actually attacked the house of the couple in the
middle of the night. But the public had become so anesthetized by the unchecked
and unchallenged fundamentalist view of Islam that the incident went virtually
unnoticed.
Zia had consistently used Islamic rhetoric to justify his repressive
measures and terrorize certain segments of society. Two weeks after Khomeini's
return to Iran in 1979, Zia's Shariat courts had issued the infamous Hudood
ordinances, which punished crimes such as stealing, adultery, and rape using the
strictest interpretation of Shariah, the law set down in the Holy Quran and the
Hadith, or sayings of the Prophet (PBUH). Under the Hudood ordinances, four
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

261

Muslim men were now required as witnesses to prove a woman's charge of rape.
Without such evidence, which was obviously almost impossible to come by, the
woman bringing the charges could be charged with adultery. The case of Safia
Bibi, a blind servant girl who bore a child after she was raped by her employer
and his son, became a classic case of fundamentalist injustice. Because neither
man confessed and Safia Bibi couldn't provide four eyewitnesses to the attack—
rape rarely being conducted in public—the two men went free while the young
woman was charged with adultery and sentenced to a public lashing and three
years' imprisonment.
Safia Bibi was saved by a campaign mounted by outraged women who
gave the incident international publicity. Embarrassed, the regime hurriedly
acquitted the young woman. A thirteen-year-old girl who became pregnant after
being raped by her uncle was not so fortunate. Unable to convince the court of
the rape, she, too, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment and ten lashes.
The court suspended her sentence until her newly born child reached the age of
two.
The Constitution of 1973 framed by my father specifically barred
discrimination against women: "there shall be no discrimination on the basis of
sex alone," read Article 25(2). Zia's political policies of Islamization not only
sanctioned discrimination, but promoted it. At Karachi University, where the
mosque had been converted into a weapons depot for the Student's Wing of the
Jamaat-e-Islami, the fundamentalist students began to agitate for campuses
segregated by gender. "Women are not safe with men," the male students
insisted. To prove their point they began to harass the female students who
chose not to cover themselves in burqas, dousing a few of them with acid which
burned through their clothes. The acid-throwing students were not punished.
Women were singled out for exclusion in all aspects of society. At some
official functions, the guests began to be divided by gender, even the highestranking women being separated from their male colleagues. On television,
female newscasters were required to cover their heads with dupattas, and those
that refused were dismissed. The athletes on Pakistan's crack women's field
hockey teams were required to keep their legs covered on the field, effectively
eliminating them from competition in international meets. The regime's Islamic
zeal occasionally reached absurd proportions. "This photograph shows a
woman's bare legs," a regime censor dressed down a newspaper editor, pointing
to a picture accompanying a story on the conclusion of a World Cup Tennis
tournament. "That is not a woman. That is Bjorn Borg," the editor pointed out to
the censor.
Women had fought back as other of the regime's ordinances
systematically diminished their influence and stature. When the regime's Shariat
courts proclaimed in February 1983 that a woman's testimony would be worth
only half that of a man's, a coalition of professional women took out a procession
in Lahore protesting the proposed Law of Evidence. The police charged the
crowd of university professors, businesswomen, and lawyers with lathi sticks and
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

262

tear gas, dragging seventy to eighty of the women off to jail by their plaits. As if
that weren't enough, the fundamentalist mullahs then declared that all the
protesters' marriages were dissolved, as aggressive women were outside the
parameters of Islam. The women could ignore the mullahs, but not the regime.
Despite the protests, Zia's Parliament passed the Law of Evidence in 1984. It
remains in effect to this day.
Other new ordinances may further denigrate a woman's work. Pending is
a law disqualifying women as witnesses in murder cases, as well as one
reducing the compensation to be paid to the relatives of a female murder victim.
Going on the supposition that a woman's worth is only half that of a man, the
woman's family would receive half the compensation paid for the murder of a
male.
For all the talk of Martial Law being lifted, Zia's Pakistan continued to be
repressive and divisive. The poor were demoralized. Women were demoralized.
Instead of settling their differences peacefully, or just living with their differences,
rival groups all over Pakistan were resorting to kidnappings and gun battles.
Violence was especially pronounced in the minority provinces of Sindh,
Baluchistan, and the Frontier, where Zia's divide-and-rule approach had led to
ethnic polarization and increased talk of secession.
From the beginning Zia's ban on political parties had gone hand-in-hand
with his patronage of secessionist leaders. Giving the secessionists' statements
full play in the press, Zia had used them to build mistrust between the minority
provinces and the Punjab, perpetuating the myth that military rule was needed to
keep the country together. The non-party elections held by the regime had
furthered the country's fragmentation. By banning political parties, the regime
forced candidates to campaign not on a platform of political ideals which
transcended ethnic and regional boundaries, but on the basis of individual
identification. "Vote for me, I'm a Shiite like you," candidates in these elections
told their constituents. "Vote for me, I'm a Punjabi."
The country was paying the price. Ethnic riots between Pathans and
muhajirs, emigrants from India, had erupted for the first time in Karachi in 1985.
More than fifty people were killed and more than a hundred wounded in the
fighting which broke out after a bus driven by a Pathan accidentally ran over a
muhajir girl. Angry mobs were soon burning hundreds of cars, scooters, and
buses. Fighting spread so rapidly that in many neighborhoods the regime had
been forced to impose curfews lasting over a month, a move which eliminated
the symptoms of the problem but did nothing to address its cause. Over the next
three years, the injuries, the death toll, the property destroyed in ethnic rioting
would only intensify. New political parties based exclusively on ethnic affiliation
would gain popularity and fan sectarian tensions higher. Pakistan's unity was on
the verge of breaking down.
"I'm thinking of going home," I told the PPP activists gathered in the
Barbican flat in January 1986 when I returned from France. They looked at me
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

263

expectantly, not sure what I had in mind. "I'll probably land in Lahore or
Peshawar," I continued. Their faces lit up. "Home" didn't mean 70 Clifton. "Home"
meant the length and breadth of Pakistan. The PPP's challenge to Zia was about
to begin.
"I'm going with you," said Nahid and Safdar Abbasi. "I'll go back too,"
Bashir Riaz joined in. "Don't make hasty decisions," I warned them, knowing that
Nahid and Bashir both had cases pending against them in Pakistan. But our
small cadre of volunteers was resolved. We would return together.
The timing seemed right. With Zia's much-vaunted lifting of Martial Law,
we could force the regime's hand and put their claims of renewed freedom to the
test. If Zia arrested me upon my return, the farce of his democracy would be
blown wide open. If he didn't, I could freely carry the PPP message to the people
of Pakistan for the first time in nine years. Psychologically, the timing seemed
auspicious as well. Two dictators had recently fallen, Ferdinand Marcos in the
Philippines and "Papa Doc" Duvalier in Haiti. The time had come for a third.
It was a major decision. But was it the right one? After my years in
detention and exile, I was unable to directly assess the political temperature in
Pakistan. So I convened a meeting of the PPP Central Executive Committee in
London. "I think this is the moment to go back," I said to the members of the top
brass, many of whom had flown in from Pakistan. "But it is up to you. There is a
good chance that something will happen to me or that I'll be arrested. What can
the PPP do in that event? Is the time right for protests and pressure on Zia for full
democracy, or should I delay my return? You all decide."
"You must return now. We'll stand by you," the leaders declared
unanimously. "If Zia takes an action against you, he will be taking an action
against all of us." I was very pleased as some sat around my small dining room
table at the Barbican drawing possible routes for my tours of Punjab, the Frontier,
and Sindh. As ever, our strategy was political, not violent, to work within the
system and not give the regime any pretext to arrest us. By organizing massive
political demonstrations all over Pakistan, we hoped to force the regime to
announce a date for early elections, possibly in the fall of 1986.
I kept adding cities to the tour. Rather than planning simultaneous
demonstrations in the major cities, I wanted the PPP to hold sequential
demonstrations over a period of time in many different cities. That way the
people's confidence could snowball, breaking the fear that Zia had inculcated in
the country with his policy of hangings, lashings, and whippings.
"Can you take so much?" the leaders asked. "I can take it," I told them
over the dinner I'd cooked of chicken and dhal. We agreed that Lahore would be
our point of entry into Pakistan. Lahore was the capital of the Punjab, the
province from which the army hailed. It was also a bastion of PPP support.
After we settled on the rest of the itinerary, the PPP leaders returned to
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

264

Pakistan to start the organizing, though the final date of my return was kept a
secret. By this time we'd learned not to give Zia a chance to prepare. We got an
unexpected bonus when the element of secrecy did our publicity work for us. All
over Pakistan, people started a guessing game. "She is coming on March 23rd,
Pakistan Day," one popular rumor ran. "No, she is coming on April 4th, her
father's death anniversary," others insisted. Even the press carried the latest
speculations.
Threats on my life began. A PPP supporter in Pakistan forwarded a
message from an army officer in Sindh. "Tell her not to come," the message said.
"They plan to kill her." Other messages of the imminent threat to my life were
coming in from Punjab, from the Frontier, from all over the country: "A woman in
politics is more vulnerable than YOU know. Don't come back." My private phone
began ringing at odd hours, early in the morning and late at night. When I picked
it up, there was one there. A friend called to tell me that a Pakistani major
carrying my picture had been intercepted at Heathrow Airport and turned back.
I didn't know whether the threats were real or the regime was just trying to
intimidate me into not returning. But there was one very ominous sign. Noor
Mohammed, my father's old and trusted former valet, had been brutally murdered
in Karachi in January. Prior to his death, I had received a letter from his young
niece and ward, Shahnaz, telling me that Noor Mohammed was very anxious to
speak to me and to please call him. The regime was after him, he'd told her
because he "knew something." I had called immediately from London but it was
too late. Both Noor Mohammed and Shahnaz, a young girl of eleven, were dead,
brutally stabbed to death. Shortly thereafter I received a letter from Noor
Mohammed himself which he had posted before his death. Again, there was the
urgent request for me to call him. What had Noor Mohammed not had the chance
to tell me?
I flew to Washington, wanting to draw attention to our upcoming test of
democracy. The people of Pakistan had been waiting for nine years for elections
and the reinstatement of a democratic government. Who knew what my return
would trigger among them and what the response would be from the regime?
Zia's prime minister Mohammed Khan Junejo had gone on record assuring me I
would not be arrested. But who knew what Zia would do?
In Washington I met with Senator Pell, Senator Kennedy, and
Congressman Stephen Solarz, the bright, energetic representative who had
monitored the recent elections in the Philippines which brought Corazon Aquino
democratically into office and who had become a personal friend of mine. They
were very supportive of my return to Pakistan. They, too, were pressing for free
elections and the restoration of human rights to Pakistan and promised to
monitor the situation there closely following my return. Mark Siegel, a political
consultant whom I had met on my visit to Washington in 1984, was also very
helpful, eliciting elected officials and other influential people to write to Pakistani
officials to warn them of grave consequences if I were mistreated. As an added
precaution, Mark bought me a bulletproof vest.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

265

Members of the American press were intrigued by the similiarities between
my upcoming battle with Zia and Corazon Aquino's challenge to Ferdinand
Marcos in the Philippines. Their views of the similiarities between Mrs. Aquino
and me were a bit romantic, however. Yes, we were both women from wellknown landowning families who had been educated in the United States. Both of
us had lost loved members of our families to dictators, Mrs. Aquino her husband,
and I, my father and brother. Mrs. Aquino had fought Marcos with "People power"
to orchestrate a peaceful revolution just as I was hoping to do in Pakistan. But
the similiarities between us ended there
In the Philippines, Corazon Aquino had enjoyed the support of both the
military and the church in her move to oust the Marcos regime. I had neither in
Pakistan. The generals opposed me because I threatened the corrupt system by
which they received discounts on land, free cars, and exemptions on customs
duties and while some of the religious establishment was with me, the
fundamentalist mullahs supported Zia's dictatorship.
Most important of all, the Americans had served notice on Marcos in the
Philippines, even providing transportation out of the country for him, his family,
and entourage. The Reagan administration however, was solidly behind Zia.
Pending before Congress was a six-year $4.02 billion military and economic aid
package Pakistan strongly supported by the Reagan White House. I could expect
little real help from America, save for the good wishes and moral support of
various members of the U.S. government and the press
"We'll go with you," several correspondents said to me. "The foreign press
are the best insurance." I thanked them, trying lot to remind myself that
opposition leader Benigno Aquino had also been accompanied back to the
Philippines by the press when he was shot to death at the airport before he even
set foot on Philippine soil. Someone had slipped a note under my door at the
Barbican: "remember Aquino."
I didn't know whether I would live or die when I returned to Pakistan. Nor
did I want to think about it much. Whatever fate God had in store for me would
await me no matter what I did or where I went. But nonetheless I wanted to
complete a commitment I had made to my father to perform the Umrah, a
religious pilgrimage in his name. Almost immediately after I returned from
Washington I flew to Mecca, accompanied by some friends. Every Muslim who is
able must make the journey to Mecca once in his life to perform the greater
pilgrimage during the month of Hajj. The Umrah, which takes only a few hours
rather than four days, can be made at any time of year.
I had the intention of going on Umrah on behalf of my father since 1978.
Twice Zia's so-called Islamic regime had denied me permission to travel to
Mecca. Not knowing what lay ahead for me now, this was my last opportunity.
In Mecca my friends and I changed into the white, seamless robes of the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

266

pilgrims and began the rituals. "Allah, You are the Peace and from You all Peace
proceeds. Oh Lord of ours greet us with peace," we prayed together in Arabic at
the Gate of Peace, the entrance to the vast white marble courtyard of the Holy
Mosque. Seven times we circled the Kaaba, the black structure fifty feet high and
thirty-five feet long which Muslims believe marks the site where Abraham built
the first house of worship dedicated to a single God. "Allahu Akbar— God is
Great," we recited each time we passed the Black Stone set in the Kaaba's
southeastern corner. The Prophet, Peace Be Upon Him, had kissed the small
stone when he helped to place it in the Kaaba in the seventh century.
I felt my burdens lighten as we performed the rituals of the Umrah. At each
stop, I prayed for my father, for the other martyrs struck down by the regime, for
my brother Shah Nawaz, for the men and women still in prison. I felt uplifted by
the religious experience, and stayed an extra day to perform the Umrah a second
time for myself. Spiritually cleansed I returned to the world of politics and flew on
to the Soviet Union, where I had been invited by a women's group. Going to
Russia, I hoped, would deflect the critics in the PPP who continued to accuse me
of being too pro-American. I needed my return to Pakistan to have as solid a
backing as possible.
On March 25th, we sent out the word: I would return to Pakistan on April
10th. The international press flocked to London in anticipation. Though we
thought our cause was politically right and just, the press saw it more as a
dramatic and poignant confrontation between a young woman and a military
dictator, a modern and feminist version of David and Goliath. "60 Minutes" filmed
me for CBS in America. Vanity Fair commissioned Lord Snowdon to do my
portrait for a magazine profile. I was on breakfast television in London and, by
satellite, in New York. The BBC recorded interviews with me in English for their
world service broadcast and in Urdu for their Urdu language news, and I met with
the AP, UPI, Channel Four, and the British press in Auntie Behjat's flat. Petula
Clark lived in the same building, and for the first time, Auntie Behjat noted dryly,
another flat had more attention than Petula's.
Anticipation of the PPP's successful challenge to Zia in the international
press was enormous. But I had no idea what to expect in Pakistan. The years of
repression might have sapped the will of many of the people to resist. In Prisoner
Without a Name, Cell Without a Number, Jacobo Timerman had observed the
stages oppressed populations go through: anger, fear, apathy. Would the people
respond to the PPP's call or had they been bludgeoned into a silence necessary
for survival? A whole generation of Pakistanis had grown up under the shadow of
Martial Law. A child of ten in July 1977 had grown into a young adult of nineteen,
unaware of his or her elementary rights. Would they want to recapture what they
had never had?
We had put ourselves on the line by announcing our intention to return.
The whole world would be watching. "How many people do you think will meet us
in Lahore?" I asked Jahangir Badar, president of PPP Punjab, who was flying
back just ahead of us.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

267

"Five hundred thousand," he said.
"That's much too high a number," I cautioned Jahangir.
"But there will be at least five hundred thousand," he protested. "You
haven't even left London and we have reports that people are already streaming
into Lahore."
"But we can't be sure," I told him. "If the press asks you, say that we
expect one hundred thousand, not five hundred thousand. That way if the crowd
is estimated at four hundred seventy thousand, no one can say it was smaller
than expected."
There was no flight from Europe to Lahore, so on April 9th I flew with
Bashir Riaz, Nahid, Safdar, my schoolfriend Humaira, and many others from
London to Dhahran in Saudi Arabia to connect with a PIA flight to Lahore. The
PIA crew was very cooperative and allowed the party supporters on the flight to
festoon the airplane with PPP banners, flags, and stickers that had been
forbidden for nine years. I can't imagine what the other passengers felt. There
were around thirty members of the PPP on the plane along with members of the
press and the flight seemed more like a charter.
The mood of celebration among us was infectious, though always tinged
with the specter of danger. During our stopover in Dhahran, the Saudi authorities
took me to a special rest house and isolated the others in a waiting room alone.
Later I found out the Pakistani ambassador had flown into Dhahran at the same
time and the Saudis were concerned with our security. The threats from Pakistan
escalated as well. Nahid, Bashir, and one other in our party received word in
Dhahran that they were on the regime's list for immediate arrest. There were
more entreaties for me not to return as well.
I tried to put the danger out of my mind and worked on my speech as we
flew on through the dawn toward Lahore. The regime was reportedly stopping
busloads of PPP supporters from crossing the borders of Baluchistan, Sindh, and
the Frontier. None of us had any idea what would greet us when we reached
Pakistan.
Lahore, April 9th, Amina Piracha:
The sight of Lahore the night before Benazir's arrival was like that of a
giant carnival or festival. Mrs. Niazi, my husband, Salim, and I came to Lahore
from Islamabad to receive her and none of us had ever seen anything like it.
Camps were set up all over the city with food and drink. There were food stalls
as well along the road to the airport. The whole city was in the hands of the
People. Students in Suzuki vans were moving through the streets, singing
songs about the Bhuttos, one lovely one in Punjabi—"Aaj te ho gai Bhutto,
Bhutto—Today, today it's only Bhutto, Bhutto." People kept arriving in cars, in
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

268

buses, in bullock carts, in trucks, by foot. I saw a whole caravan of buses
jammed with people, waving banners: "This bus is from Badin, this bus is from
Sanghar." After all the long year of repression and ugliness and depression,
there was excitement for the first time.
No one slept the whole night. We walked around the city and back and
forth to the airport along with everyone else. One old man walked with us for a
way, tears in his eyes. Another old lady joined us, crying bitterly at times, then
smiling. No one had been able to grieve for Mr. Bhutto. There had been no
formal mourning period. Now people were finally able to express their grief as
well is their joy over Benazir's return. Lahore that night was one of the most
beautiful experiences of my life.
Dr. Ashraf Abbasi:
It was like an Eid. Free meat and rice and fruit were being distributed to
the people. People were singing and dancing everywhere and the air was filled
with the sound of drums and clapping. Cassette players were blasting songs
about Mr. Bhutto, about the PPP, about Benazir. The words were very catchy
and were set to famous songs so everyone picked them up just like that. PPP
flags suddenly fluttered from every balcony and lamppost. People had gathered
green, red, and black fabric and had been making them secretly in preparation
for Benazir's return. Even our fundamentalist opponents in the Jamaat-e-Islami
were selling banners and pictures of Benazir in the street, taking advantage of
our support to make money for themselves.
Mrs. iazi:
I so wished my husband and my daughter Yasmin could have seen
Lahore, but the regime still had serious charges outstanding against them in
Islamabad, and they couldn't return from London. Really, the celebration was a
vindication of the suffering of the people. I kept being reminded of the lady who
during the horrible period of persecution had told me that the Pakistan People's
Party was finished, that Mr. Bhutto's name would never be uttered in public
again. No, I'd told her. The PPP will never be finished because the people are
the party. The day will come when you will see Mr. Bhutto's name printed freely.
Now that day had come and everyone's emotions were pouring out.
Samiya:
The authorities were still putting huge iron bars and barbed-wire
barricades at the airport to keep the crowds back during Benazir's arrival. Even
the airport's entry and departure routes had been restructured. At 4 A.M. we all
gathered at a rendezvous point. The administration was allowing only two
hundred into the airport and we were given passes. They took us into the
airport from a back way. I had a lump in my throat. We were all so happy we
didn't know what was happening to us.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

269

Dr. Abbasi:
But our happiness mingled with fear. We were so afraid for Benazir's
security that we all arranged to throng around her and form a human shield.
There were so many people, so many, many people gathering in Lahore. Who
knew who was among them?
The pilot's voice crackled over the public address system in the plane just
before 7 A.M. "We are beginning our descent into Lahore," the pilot said. "We
welcome Miss Benazir Bhutto back to Pakistan." A flight attendant came to my
seat. "The pilot has just received word from the ground that there are one million
people waiting at the airport," she said.
One million people. I looked out the window, but could see nothing but the
vibrant green fields of Punjab. "Come up to the cockpit and see for yourself," the
flight attendant said. I peered out the front of the plane, but could see nothing in
the distance but the approaching runway. There were tiny stick figures all around
the runway and on tops of the airport buildings.
As we landed, I saw that (hey were security forces. The precautions were
in fact so tight at the airport that all other flights were prevented from landing.
"Nahid, Bashir, Dara. Stay close to me," I told those who had been warned
of their imminent arrests. It was ironic, my supporters crowding around me for my
protection, I keeping them close to me for their protection. "We're your security,"
the members of the press said. But the crush of people outside the airport turned
out to be our security.
The immigration authorities were so anxious to get us away from the airport
that they conducted their formalities on the plane, quickly stamping all our
passports.
Home. I was home. As I stepped onto Pakistani soil, I paused to feel the
earth under my feet, to breathe the air of which I was a part. I had flown into
Lahore many times. I had spent many happy times here. But it was also the city
where my father had been condemned to death. Now I was coming back to
challenge his murderer, the general who had committed high treason by
overthrowing the Constitution.
Samiya! Amina! Dr. Abbasi! "I don't know how we're going to get out of
here, there are so many people," Samiya said in the terminal, adding to the
garlands of roses around my neck. "We're going by truck," Jahangir said, leading
me to a typically brightly painted truck, its handwrought tin designs gleaming.
I gripped the notes for my speech as I looked at the rickety stairs leading
to the platform which had been built on the top of the truck for me to ride on. I
sometimes had nightmares of a stairway I didn't want to climb, but had to.
Suddenly that very stairway was in front of me and hundreds of expectant eyes
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

270

were waiting to watch me climb it What could I do? We had agreed on this mode
of transportation in London to take me to the Minar-i-Pakistan, the monument my
father had built in Lahore to commemorate the declaration that led to Pakistan's
birth. I couldn't change the plan now. There were a million people waiting outside
the gates. I put my foot on the first step and took a deep breath. "BISMALLAH," I
said to myself. "In the name of God, I begin."
There are moments in life which are not possible to describe. My return to
Lahore was one of them. The sea of humanity lining the roads, jammed on
balconies and roofs, wedged in trees and on lampposts, walking alongside the
truck, and stretching back across the fields, was more like an ocean. The eightmile drive from the airport to the Minar-i-Pakistan in Iqbal Park usually takes
fifteen minutes. On the unbelievable day of April 10, 1986, it took us ten hours.
The figure of one million people at the airport grew to two million, then three
million by the time we reached the Minar-i-Pakistan.
Hundreds of colored balloons soared into the sky as the airport gates
opened. Rose petals, not tear gas, filled the air, showering onto the truck until
they rose above my ankles. Garlands of flowers flew through the air. I saw a girl
whose brother had been hanged and threw a garland to her. More garlands were
thrown onto the truck, as were hundreds of handmade dupattas and shawls. I put
one dupatta after another on my head and slung others on my shoulder. When
we passed former political prisoners I recognized in the throng, I threw flowers
and the embroidered cloths to them as well as to the families of those who had
been hanged or tortured, and the young and very old women who lined the route.
The black, green, and red colors of the PPP seemed the only colors in
Lahore that day. PPP banners and flags billowed in the dry, hot breeze until they
formed an almost continuous canopy. People were wearing red, green, and black
vests, dupattas, shalwar khameez, hats. Donkeys and water buffalo had PPP
ribbons braided into their manes and tails. The same colors rimmed photographs
and posters of my father, my mother, my brothers, me.
"Jeevay, jeevay, Bhutto jeevay! Live, live, Bhutto live!" the crowds roared
in Punjabi, a sentiment that just three months before would have cost them
rigorous imprisonment and lashes. "Munjhe bhen, thunje bhen, Benazir—My
sister, your sister, Benazir," others called out in Sindhi. There were slogans in
Urdu, in Pashtu, in every dialect of every region in Pakistan. "Benazir, ay gi,
inqilab ly gi—Benazir will come, revolution will come," our supporters had said
before my return. Now they called out loudly, "Benazir ay hai, inqilab ly hai—
Benazir has come, revolution has come." When I waved, the crowds waved.
When I clapped my hands over my head as my father had done, the crowds
clapped back, their upraised arms undulating like ripples on a vast field of wheat.
There were times when I was in detention in Islamabad in that almostempty house that I would wake up in the morning, hearing the roar of a crowd. I
would fight the mist in my mind, trying to identify the crowd. Who were they
shouting for? And what tone were they shouting in? Were they shouting in anger
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

271

against Zia? Or were they shouting in joy at seeing the doors of Rawalpindi Jail
swing open and my father step out? That was not to be. But I continued to hear
the roar while I was in Sukkur Jail, Karachi Central Jail, in sub-jail at Al-Murtaza
and 70 Clifton. I would search my mind to identify the sound, but it always eluded
me. As I moved through the tunnel of sound in the streets of Lahore on April
10th, I suddenly realized that this was the roar I had heard all those times before.
I stood on the top of the truck for all ten hours as we inched our way
toward the Minar, past the prime minister's quarters at the governor's house
where our family occasionally stayed but where, after my father's assassination,
General Zia reportedly wandered sleepless through the corridors with a lamp like
Lady Macbeth. We went past the Zamzama, Kim's gun immortalized by Rudyard
Kipling. I felt lighter and lighter, sure that the martyrs who'd given their lives for
democracy were walking happily together through the crowd. There was such an
atmosphere of victory, of triumph, of vindication over our trials and suffering. "Zia
ul-Haq, we have not accepted you," the crowds were crying out. "We don't want
your handpicked assemblies. We don't want your bogus Constitution. We don't
want your dictatorship. Our spirit is greater than all your tear gas, lashing racks,
and bullets. We want elections."
Though I was totally exposed on the truck, I felt no danger. Only someone
who was willing to be torn apart by the crowd could harm me. There was no
threat either from the police or the army. Overwhelmed by the crowds, some of
our former enemies stayed behind the locked gates of their barracks, while many
others came out to join in the celebration. My greatest concern was my voice,
which was hoarse from a recent bout of flu. Along the route I kept flushing my
throat with Disprin and warm water and drinking a glucose solution which my
father's valet Urs had brought with him from Karachi.
The sun was beginning to set at the Minar-i-Pakistan by the time we
arrived. There was not an inch of free space on the grounds for the hundreds of
thousands who had come with us along the route. We barely made it to the stage
ourselves. I had no security guards at that time to move me through the crowds.
We also had not yet devised the strategy of driving right up to the stage on the
truck so I only needed to step onto the platform. At the Minar, I dismounted with
only four or five friends around me, struggling against the surge of the crowd.
The crowd meant no harm, but the excitement of the moment was nearing
frenzy. The people surged toward me, pushing and shoving, trying to break into
the circle around me. I thought we were going to die right there, either suffocated
or trampled to death. Many seemed to have lost their senses, including a local
party leader who was hurling himself against my battered cordon of friends. I had
to give him a hard push to snap him out of it. Somehow we made it to the stage,
where the president of the Punjab PPP had collapsed in exhaustion. "Perhaps
we should discuss security," I said, sidestepping him.
What a scene greeted me as I looked out over the grounds of Iqbal Park.
Across the way the red sandstone of the Badshahi Mosque, one of the largest
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

272

mosques in the world, glowed as if on fire in the last rays of the sun. Looming out
of the shadows to the right was the Lahore Fort, the Moghul fortress in whose
dungeons our supporters had been tortured and had died. And everywhere,
everywhere, were people welcoming me home. "Some people advised me to
leave politics," I called out in Urdu. "They warned that I could meet the fate of my
father and brother. Some said the Pakistani political arena was not for women.
My answer to all of them was that my party workers will protect me from danger. I
have willingly taken the path of thorns and stepped into the valley of death."
The loudspeaker system wasn't working well and certainly couldn't reach
ten times the number of people we'd anticipated. But as if by telepathy, the
people fell quiet with one motion of my hand. "Here and now, I vow I will make
every sacrifice to secure people's rights," I called out. "Do you want freedom? Do
you want democracy? Do you want revolution?" "Yes!" the roar came back every
time, three million voices shouting as one. "I have returned because I want to
serve the people, not to seek revenge," I told them. "I put an end to revenge. I
don't have any such feelings in my heart. I want to build Pakistan. But first I must
take a referendum from you. Do you want Zia to stay?" "No!" the sound wave
roared. "Do you want Zia to go?" "Yes!" the roar mounted. "Then the decision is
Zia jahve!" I called out. "Zia must go!" "jahve! jahve! Jahve!" millions of voices
cried into the darkening sky.
There was not a single incident of violence during the entire day. Nor was
there anything but a peaceful challenge to the regime. The crowd was so
responsive that many felt the regime could have been brought down that night.
With just a word, the crowd would have destroyed the Punjab Assembly, the
ministers' houses, the Lahore High Court, where Zia's handpicked bench had
sentenced my father to death. But we didn't want to come to power through
bloodshed. We wanted to bring about democracy through peaceful and legitimate
elections. It was the regime that used violence to gain their ends, not us. And that
night, they struck again.
I was just sinking into the first sleep I'd had in forty-eight hours when
someone knocked urgently on my bedroom door. For my own security, the local
party officials had said I was staying at three different houses. One of them, the
house belonging to the family of Khalid Ahmed, where earlier I had met with the
foreign press after returning from the Minar-i-Pakistan, had just been ransacked
by an army major What an ominous reminder that I was back in Zia's Pakistan.
The major had been looking for me.
Azra Khalid:
I was sleeping when one of the servants woke me. He was bleeding after
being attacked in the servants' quarters by a contingent of army men. Fifteen
or sixteen men had climbed over the compound walls, beaten the servants,
and were coming to the house asking for Benazir, he told me. Our front door
was locked, but the men broke down the door and threw flower pots through
the front windows. "Where is Benazir?" asked their leader, one Major Qayyum,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

273

who was waving a pistol. One of the servants who'd been sleeping outside
snuck up behind Major Qayyum and hit him on the head with his son's cricket
bat. "I'm an intelligence officer, a commando," the major cried out.
I called the police, although since Zia you never knew if they were your
friends or your enemies. As the police car drew up, the other army men ran.
The police arrested Major Qayyum. In his car was a crate of beer and whiskey
which he was going to plant in our house. And in his diary were the phone
numbers of many top generals and ministers in the regime.
Major Qayyum pretended to be crazy. The regime, too, said he was mad
and had been working on his own. But we knew Major Qayyum wasn't crazy.
Benazir's reception that day in Lahore had been so in-credible the regime
didn't dare touch her. Instead they sent Major Qayyum to either kill her or scare
her off from continuing her tour. Major Qayyum was in jail for only a short time.
When he returned to his village, he was shot dead for no apparent reason. We
think the regime killed him to destroy the evidence.
Gujranwala. Faisalabad. Sargodha. Jhelum. Rawalpindi. "The reception in
Lahore was unique," our critics and even some newspapers declared. "Benazir
Bhutto won't find such welcomes in other cities." They were wrong. We set off
from Lahore on our tour of the Punjab at midday on April 12th, planning to reach
Gujranwala for a 5 P.M. rally. But the roads were so massed with people,
surrounding the truck for miles, that we didn't reach Gujranwala until 5 A.M. the
next morning. "There won't be anybody at the public meeting," I said. "They'll all
be home in bed." Instead the meeting ground was packed. The people had
waited all night long.
"We must try to move faster," I said to our volunteer security guards. But it
was impossible. There were so many people on the road between Gujranwala
and Faisalabad that the fifty-mile journey took sixteen hours. A convoy of trucks,
buses, rickshaws, and motorcycles surrounded us, forcing the oncoming traffic
onto the side of the road. Thousands walked by the truck through the entire night,
like a giant honor guard. I stayed on the top of the truck, waving to the people.
"Throw flowers all over and put pearls on the paths because Benazir has
arrived," the people sang. "Oh God, bring those days back when the poor
suffering people have happy days!" It was a very humbling experience for me
and the other PPP officials. "Give us the courage and the wisdom to fulfill the
people's expectations," we prayed together on the truck as we inched along.
The sun was rising over Faisalabad when we finally arrived on the
outskirts of the industrial city. Once again we were half a day late for the public
meeting at the sports field where I had nervously delivered my first speech nine
years before. Again I was sure that the grounds would be empty. But as the truck
pulled through the gates, a roar went up from hundreds of thousands of throats.
"Qawm ke takdir? Benazir, Benazir! Who is the fate of the people? Benazir,
Benazir!" The excitement didn't subside when we left the sports field. Though
many of the factory owners in Faisalabad had closed their factory gates, even
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

274

locking them so the workers couldn't get out to show their support for the PPP,
the men jumped over the walls to join us.
Jhelum, where many in the army were recruited. Rawalpindi, a city of
government servants. Even in these cities, where the people were more
predisposed to either ignore or downplay the PPP challenge to Zia, the turnouts
were tumultuous. The foreign journalists and television crews could not believe
the size of the crowds that they were recording for their countrymen. My
countrymen would see nothing. Though Martial Law was supposedly lifted, the
regime had forbidden my image to appear on Pakistani television. Neither this
tour nor any other public political appearance I've made since my return to
Pakistan has ever appeared on television.
Press conferences. Condolence calls. Party meetings. I don't know Where
the energy came from. The people's reception acted as a tonic, but there were
moments when I was engulfed in sadness. I kept Picturing Shah's body lying on
the carpet in Cannes, and my father in his death cell. How I wished they could
come back for just one Moment to see this vindication of their suffering. As
children we had been taught that no price was too high to pay for our country.
But the personal price to our family had been high.
To ease my sadness, I asked that the route into Rawalpindi be altered so I
wouldn't have to pass Rawalpindi District Jail, where my father had died. But I
could not avoid the tragedies and sacrifices of others. At Gujranwala I visited the
grave of Pervez Yaqoub, the first to immolate himself in protest over my father's
death sentence. In Rawalpindi I paid a condolence call to the family of one of the
three young boys hanged in August 1984. So many lives lost, so much tragedy.
This boy, like the others, had been only sixteen when he was arrested and
nineteen when he died. "Look at all these crowds," his mother said to me. "There
was a time when people were too frightened to speak to us."
We moved on to Peshawar in the Frontier Province, the president of the
PPP in Punjab handing me over to the president of the PPP Frontier at the
border. Again the road was completely blocked by people, causing us to arrive in
the frontier city at night. The regime had blacked out all the streetlights so no one
could see my arrival, but the people shone flashlights and home video lights at
the truck to illuminate me.
My security chief was very apprehensive as we moved slowly through the
narrow streets of this ancient trading city an hour east of the Khyber Pass and
Afghanistan. There were three million Afghan refugees in Pakistan who were
being supported by Zia and many of them lived in or near Peshawar. We had
heard rumors that the regime was going to have the Afghan mujahideen kill me.
Though I didn't know it, the security chief had asked the women on the truck,
including his own wife, to cluster tightly around me so I would be less of a target.
Bathed in the only light in the dark streets, however, I was absolutely vulnerable.
But there was no attack.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

275

"I salute the brave Pakhtoons just as my father did," I said to the
continually clapping crowd in a stadium flooded with lights run by our own
generators. I was at a disadvantage in Peshawar, one of the workers having lost
the notes to my speech. But it was important to reintroduce myself to this very
conservative society whose threat to break away from Pakistan and form the
independent nation of Pakhtoonistan was very real. It was also necessary to
convince the male-dominated Pathan society that a woman could lead them.
"People think I am weak because I am a woman," I called out to the
crowds, 99 percent of whom were men. "Do they not know that am a Muslim
woman, and that Muslim women have a heritage to be proud of? I have the
patience of Bibi Khadija, the wife of the Prophet, Peace Be Upon Him. I have the
perseverance of Bibi Zeinab, the sister of Imam Hussein. And I have the courage
of Bibi Aisha, the Prophet's favorite wife, who rode her own camel into battle at
the head of the Muslims. I am the daughter of martyr Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the sister
of martyr Shah Nawaz Khan Bhutto, and I am your sister as well. I challenge my
opponents to come and meet me on the field of democratic elections." The
clapping turned into a cheer. "Zia za!" I cried out, using the Pashttu word for "go."
"Za! Za!" the people roared in response.
After addressing the Peshawar Bar Association the next day, we returned
to Punjab to move on through, Lahore, Okara, Pakpattan, Vehari, and Multan,
where I paid tribute to the hundreds of workers massacred in the textile mills
eight years before. Then home to Sindh and Karachi, where the residents of my
own city did their best to outdo the crowds in Lahore, before moving on to Quetta
in Baluchistan, and back into Sindh to tour Thatta, Badin, Hyderabad, and finally
Larkana during the fast of Ramazan. "Maravee malir jee, Benazir, Benazir!" the
crowds roared, calling me by the name of a Sindhi folk heroine who had refused
to yield to the demands of a local tyrant. Though he locked her up in a fortress
and kept her prisoner, the legend ran, he had never been able to break her spirit
or her love for her people.
It was so hot in Larkana that I put ice cubes on my head and shoulders
under my dupatta during the trip from the airport to the sports stadium where ten
months before the men had massed in the final prayer ceremony for my brother
Shah The crowds were so thick we had to change our route to get to the stadium
before sundown. I stood the whole time through the sunroof of my Pajero jeep
and then on a truck in the scalding heat, intermittently sucking on lemons and
salt. The PPP president of Larkana went down with heatstroke. "Don't let me
faint," I kept praying, knowing all our foes would love me to collapse. And I made
it through the public meeting.
Rumors of death threats and me meeting disruptions preceded me
everywhere in the nineteen-city tour, becoming particularly pressing in
Baluchistan, where my security guards spotted three Afghan mujahideen
squatting on their haunches in the front of the crowd with automatic weapons
concealed under them, it wasn't the weapons that were alarming. Most men in
Baluchistan openly carried guns. It was the fact that these weapons were
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

276

concealed The guards told me nothing about the suspicious Afghanis and
instead positioned themselves right in front of them during my speech so that
they would take the bullets and not me.
I was concerned enough about getting dizzy on the revolving stage built
for the occasion so that everyone in the enormous crowd would be able to see
me. But as I looked out over the masses of people, many of whom were poor and
noticeably thin, I forgot my apprehension Baluchistan was and is a povertystricken and quite backward province, the tribal chieftains resisting any progress
that would loosen their control over the people. Until my father's time, there were
din tracks but no roads in Baluchistan, no electricity, little fresh water and limited
crops from the unirrigated, unforgiving soil of the desert. For generations, the
people had been exposed to nothing but hardship.
I had been in Baluchistan once with my mother when she had been
surrounded by women and children while seeking shade under a tree. Her
security guards were trying to chase them away, but my mother said to stop and
let the women come to her. In wonder they began to touch my mother's hair,
which was smooth and clean while theirs was gnarled and dirty. They didn't know
what combs were. My father's government had done much to improve the lot of
the people in Baluchistan, in spite of the tribal heads who had launched an
insurgency against the PPP government.
"The Pakistan People's Party believes that the well-being of the nation is
in the well-being of the people," I called out from the slowly revolving stage. "If
the man in the street has the security of labor, if he has access to good health
care and his children can get education and prosper, then the country will
prosper. It is not the law of God that our people should live in poverty. The
destiny of our nation is not slums. If we have the power to transform it through
efficient use of our country's resources, then we must." The people in the
audience rose and started clapping, including the three Afghanis in the front row.
My security guards heaved sighs of relief. The danger was over.
But it was not. In the rest of the country, it was just beginning. On May
30th, less than two weeks after I returned to Karachi, the police entered a youth
hostel in Hyderabad to ambush and kill Faqir Iqbal Hisbani, the PPP president of
the Sindh Student's People's Federation and our chief of security for the whole
province. His companion and PPP member, Jahangir Pathan, was permanently
paralyzed in the attack, the policemen's bullets shattering his spine.
I felt the blood run out of me when Dost Mohammed woke me in the early
hours of the morning with the news of Iqbal Hisbani`s murder. More black
armbands, more black headbands, black dupattas, black flags. Another funeral
for a young man whom I'd trusted literally with my life. Another condolence call to
a mother who'd lost her only son. She gave me a prayer she had written out for
her son to replace the one he'd lost in the melee of my procession into
Hyderabad. "You take it," his mother said to me. "This is a present to you from
Iqbal." I still carry the prayer with me in my handbag. How many more good
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

277

people were to die at the hands of the regime?
Peaceful demonstrations were held all over Pakistan to protest Iqbal
Hisbani's murder. But the regime remained intent on violence. At one protest
meeting in Kashmor, a member of Zia's Provincial Assembly fired a Kalashnikov
into the crowd to break it up. Luckily no one was killed, but it signaled a new and
dangerous directive from the regime. Control your areas with bullets. Control
them with injury and death. But control them.
Within weeks, two more members of the PPP were dead, the president of
the PPP Dokri and a party worker shot down in Tando, Mohammed Khan.
Another member of Zia's Provincial Assembly was suspected in the first death,
and in the second, a police inspector using an automatic weapon not issued to
the police. "A minister in the Sindh cabinet gave it to me to kill the PPP dogs," the
inspector was reported by local citizens as saying at a tea shop. The regime was
now arming lesser politicians and other subordinates to do their dirty work for
them.
We were on a collision course with the regime. We knew it. And they knew
it. No policy decisions were being made, all the regime's energies being focused
on the actions of the PPP. When the government released its budget in June we
countered with the People's Budget. When they thought we were going to launch
a movement in Sindh after the end of Ramazan, they declared a state of
emergency in the province. When we didn't launch a movement, they deferred
their state of emergency. With the regime off balance, it was time to launch the
second phase of our campaign to force Zia to hold elections in the autumn.
July 5, 1986. The ninth anniversary of the coup. We called it "Black Day"
and planned public meetings in all the district headquarters of Pakistan, from the
Khunjrab Pass into China to the Arabian Sea. No one knew if the political
structure of the PPP was strong enough yet to coordinate such simultaneous
demonstrations. "Black Day" was almost a rehearsal to see if the local and
regional party officials were organized enough to manage the massive civil
protests we were planning for the fall to force the regime to hold early elections.
To ensure the effectiveness of the demonstrations in the autumn, we needed to
recruit over one hundred thousand "Doves of Democracy," PPP sympathizers
who would be willing to court arrest by staging hunger strikes and sit-ins. Every
detail had to be worked out in advance As July 5th neared, I crisscrossed the
country to help with the organizational state of the party. And "Black Day" went
remarkably well. One hundred fifty thousand PPP supporters turned out in
Karachi, more than two hundred thousand in Lahore.
August 14th, the anniversary of Pakistan's independence, was the next
important date on the calendar. Stung by the outpourings of support for the PPP
during my tour of Pakistan, Zia's handpicked prime minister, Mohammed Khan
Junejo, announced that the regime's official Muslim League party would hold a
rally on August 14th at the Minar-i-Pakistan in Lahore. As soon as Junejo
announced his political intentions, we announced that the PPP, too, would hold a
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

278

rally in Lahore on Independence Day, knowing our crowds would be much
bigger. The regime moved to preempt our crowds by reserving all the buses in
Punjab to transport their own supporters. "Go in the regime's buses," we advised
the PPP members. "When you get to Lahore, walk over to our side."
The MRD, too, joined the fray. Since my return to Pakistan, PPP leaders
and I had been holding talks with members of the Movement to Restore
Democracy, the coalition of political parties formed shortly before the hijacking in
1981, and had informally agreed to join forces again to put pressure on the
regime. On August 10th, the nine leaders of the MRD came to 70 Clifton for the
first time in three years to cement our agreement. One of the leaders came
wearing the white cloth of the Haj around him. The regime had stopped him at
the airport on his way to make the pilgrimage.
Zia, on the other hand, was out of the country and on the run. In the face
of his imminent humiliation and repudiation at the Independence Day rallies, he
had left for Saudi Arabia on August 7th, taking his whole family with him. A PPP
sympathizer at the airport confided to us that Zia had also shipped out three
airline containers of furniture, and a gold-plated Rolls-Royce given to him in his
capacity as president by an Arab head of state.
Once more the timing was critical. At the end of our meeting, the leaders
of the MRD and I agreed on a plan to hold protest meetings within the framework
of the law and to press for elections. The next day the MRD announced that the
PPP and other opposition groups would hold joint rallies in Karachi and Lahore
on Independence Day, and called on Zia to announce the date for elections by
September 20th. This time, it was Junejo's nerves that cracked.
I was meeting with several journalists and party workers on August 12th
when I was told Junejo was about to make an unscheduled announcement on
radio and television. We watched as Junejo, citing possible "confrontation"
between supporters of the Muslim League and those of the opposition parties,
announced he was canceling the Muslim League's public meeting on
Independence Day. He appealed to the opposition parties to cancel our
meetings, too, though no administrative order was issued banning public
meetings.
I wasn't surprised at Junejo's attempt to save face though I was very angry
at his inference of violence. The regime had consistently tried to provoke
violence at our public meetings and processions, while we remained equally
determined to bring about change peacefully through political means. My
volunteer security guards didn't even carry arms. But Zia's puppet minister had to
create some pretext for curtailing political expression in Pakistan a full eight
months after Martial Law had supposedly been lifted. He couldn't risk exposing
the true face of the regime. Junejo had just returned from the United States,
where President Reagan had praised Pakistan for making "great strides in the
transition towards democracy." Junejo himself had boasted to Time magazine
that he had solved the problems in Pakistan by lifting Martial Law and imposing
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

279

democracy. "We did it," he claimed. "Now what is left for elections?"
"This is a big victory for us," I said to the party workers assembled in my
office while we watched Junejo call off his own political rally. "Junejo claims to be
the democratic prime minister, but where is his support? He's canceled his own
meeting because he knows he'll be shown up by the PPP. The regime is running
from the field."
"Now we don't have to hold the August 14th demonstrations at all," one
person said. "We've won already."
"No, we should go ahead," another offered. "Why not hold the public
meetings on the 15th?"
"The 15th is India Independence Day."
"Then the 16th."
"I'm going to a meeting of the PPP in Faisalabad tomorrow," I told the
workers. "We'll make a decision then."
I went right from the informal meeting at 70 Clifton to an emergency
meeting called by the MRD. The mood there was very different.
The MRD leaders were very angry at me for even suggesting that I consult
with other leaders of the PPP about rescheduling the demonstrations. "You don't
know anything about politics," they said. "We must go ahead with the
demonstration on Independence Day. This is the time. We cannot backtrack
now."
I protested. Who knew what lengths the regime would go to so as to avoid
embarrassment. The PPP was not prepared for a showdown. We'd just had the
massive meetings on "Black Day" and there wasn't time or the organization to
ready the people so quickly for another one. More important, our strategy was
not to antagonize the regime directly, but over time to increase the tempo of
political demonstrations to erode the regime. With the government paralyzed by
strikes and sit-ins, business would be affected, the economy would be affected,
the entire life of the country would be affected, breeding a greater discontent
against the regime. Having a confrontation now with the regime would be
counterproductive. The party leaders would probably be arrested. Many of the
party sympathizers could be arrested. And the momentum would be stalled.
"We must go ahead," the MRD leaders said.
I was caught on the horns of a dilemma. Either the coalition between the
MRD and the PPP would be severed or I had to acquiesce. The consensus was
that we should participate in the demonstrations. I was the only dissenting vote
out of nine.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

280

"All right then, we'll go ahead," I said reluctantly. "But for God's sake, don't
announce the plan tonight. At least wait until tomorrow." I needed time, if only
hours, to tell the party leaders to go underground. If we were all arrested, then
the plans for the fall would come to nothing. The MRD made the announcement
anyway.
August 13, 1986.
I go to the airport to fly as planned to the meeting of the PPP in
Faisalabad. The police meet me at the gate. "We have orders externing you from
Punjab, but if you want to go, you can," they tell me. They are using a new tactic,
I realize, trying to provoke me into going despite their orders so that later they
can claim I created trouble while they tried to prevent it. I refuse to play their
game. Instead I consult hastily at the airport with PPP members who are with me.
I fully expect to find the police waiting for me when I return to 70 Clifton and give
the PPP members last-minute instructions, directing each of them to coordinate
party activists in different parts of the country in the event of my arrest.
When I return to 70 Clifton, there are no police. Another peculiarity. But Radio
India mistakenly announces my arrest and the calls start coming in. There are
riots in Lyari protesting my arrest. The people gathered at the airport in
Faisalabad to greet me are being teargassed and beaten by the police. So much
for the regime's "great strides . . . towards democracy."
I continue to wait for the police. Nobody comes. Meanwhile every other
leader in the PPP and the MRD is being arrested. For the first time, they are all in
and I am out. The regime wants to paralyze the party without touching me, I
decide, to escape the opprobrium of the world, especially the United States,
where the new aid package will be voted on in the fall.
The press swarm to 70 Clifton—Ross Munro from Time magazine a BBC
television cameraman; Anne Fadiman from Life, who is an old friend from
Radcliffe and is in Karachi with photographer Mary Ellen Mark to do a story on
my return to Pakistan; Mahmood Sham and Hazoor Shah, veteran
correspondents from Jang and Dawn. By late afternoon, almost one thousand
PPP and MRD leaders and workers are in detention. But not me.
A reporter arrives from the Karachi Press Club. He's just heard from one
of the opposition leaders that the MRD meeting is still scheduled for tomorrow in
Karachi and I will be attending it. I am taken aback. No one has consulted me
about my plans. But the news spreads. That night the BBC announces three
times in one broadcast that I'm going to the MRD meeting in Karachi on the 14th.
I don't want to be forced into a provocative position by the regime or the MRD.
But what can I do? If I don't go now, the opposition can claim I've lost my nerve.
I pass a message to one or two people in the lower party echelons to
round up everyone who has managed to elude the police to come to 70 Clifton in
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

281

the morning so that we can all go to the meeting in a procession.
August 14, 1986, Pakistan Independence Day.
"Jiye, Bhutto! My sister, your sister, Benazir!" When I wake up in the
morning, I can hear the political slogans beginning to rise outside the walls of 70
Clifton. There are thousands of PPP supporters massed in front of the house,
alerted to my appearance at the MRD rally by other party members and the BBC
broadcasts. A message comes in which explains why I still haven't been
arrested. Unable to make a decision, the regime had telexed Zia in Saudi Arabia
after the MRD announcement last night, asking him what to do about me. His
answer didn't come back until 9 A.M. Pakistani time. "Arrest her," Zia telexed
back. But by that time, the police don't dare. "All those PPP supporters outside
70 Clifton? They would have lynched me," a policeman tells me later. The police
are also hesitant to fire into the crowd and start any disturbance around 70
Clifton. The Clifton area is home, too, to many diplomats, and the police do not
want enraged crowds to take out their anger by burning the embassies.
The police are also confused about my whereabouts. My friend Putchie
had spent the night at 70 Clifton. She had left in a car early in the morning and
the intelligence agents can't figure out whether it was me. There is conjecture
that I've slipped away to Faisalabad in spite of the travel ban. They have no idea
if I am even in the house. They soon find out, however.
"What time are you going?" A representative of the MRD phones me at 70
Clifton. "We'll be leaving at two o'clock," I tell him. Shortly thereafter, I receive
word that the police are coming to arrest me at 2 P.M., though they have no
grounds. The home secretary hasn't announced a ban on the rally.
We decide to leave at one o'clock and the journalists gather. At Harvard, I
remember ruefully, I used to occasionally read the column in Life called "Life
Goes to the Movies." Now Life is going to a confrontation with the Pakistani
police and my certain arrest. I am worried about Anne Fadiman. Ross Munro,
Time's bureau chief in New Delhi, is used to politics on the subcontinent. No one
knows what will happen when we leave 70 Clifton.
"Qul Huwwa Allahu Ahad, Say He Is One God," I read from the Holy
Quran in the doorway of the house. Anne Fadiman, Ross Munro, the BBC
television cameraman, a few members of the PPP, and my friend Putchie get in
one Pajero jeep. I get in my own, covered with political stickers, with its public
address system, cassettes of PPP songs, and PPP flags mounted on the bonnet.
Samiya travels with me, as do a few other political workers and photographer
Mary Ellen Mark. As the gates swing open, I stand up on the back seat through
the sunroof. "Marain gai, mar jain gai, Benazir, ko lahain gai—We'll beat them/
We'll die/But we'll bring Benazir," the crowd chants in Urdu, crushing around the
Pajero. My honor guard has swelled to five thousand.
Whoosh. The police fire the first round of tear gas as we near MidEast
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

282

Hospital, the first of three thousand tear-gas shells that will be fired that day in
Karachi, three hundred of them on the road to Clifton alone. The next barrage
comes at the roundabout where the police, on their way to arrest me at home,
are sandwiched in the crowd. The police try to beat their way through the crowd
to get to the Pajero, firing tear gas. Someone in the Pajero pulls me down and
closes the sunroof as we cough and choke. We put salt and lemons on our
tongues, and cover our faces with the wet towels we've brought with us. I worry
about the defenseless crowds and the PPP officials and the journalists in the
other van.
Anne Fadiman:
You could hardly see out the windows the clouds of tear gas were so
thick. We tried to close the sunroof in our Pajero as it filled with gas, but the
sunroof got stuck hallway. When we finally did get it closed, all the more
complicated by the crowds scrambling onto the Pajero and reaching their
hands through the sunroof just to touch anyone close to Benazir, the situation
was much worse. We were locked in with the tear gas, which we found out the
next day was made in America by Smith and Wesson.
Ross had been teargassed before and knew what to do. We cupped water
in our hands and soaked our eyes, and held wet handkerchiefs to each other's
eyes, but it was really bad. Putchie, who had asthma, had luckily gotten out of
the Pajero as soon as the tear gas had started and gone home. But the rest of
us suffered from the tear gas for weeks. I had steroid shots when I got home to
ease what the doctor called a "deep inhalation dose." I was lucky. Bashir Riaz,
I heard later, was ill for several months.
In the chaos of people, police, and tear gas, the drivers of the Pajeros
decide to leave the roundabout by two different roads to confuse the police. We
each take off down back roads to get to the MRD rally in Lyari, the poorest
section of Karachi and the stronghold of the PPP. But every time the police spot
our cavalcade, now a long line of buses, trucks, and cars, they radio ahead and
we run into a roadblock. We meet up with the other Pajero and decide to head for
the tomb of Mohammed Ah Jinnah. We are blocked from there as well. We are
playing a deadly game of hide-and-seek with the police. We head back toward
Lyari when we suddenly get a flat tire. There isn't time to get out the jack and a
crowd quickly gathers to hold up the side of the Pajero while the tire is replaced.
We're off again as the police close in.
Ross Munro
A crowd of as many as ten thousand was seething around the motorcade
when it arrived at Chakiwara Chowk, an expansive public square in Lyari.
Benazir scored at least a symbolic victory by reaching the site and speaking for a
few minutes. "You are all my brothers and sisters," she shouted in Urdu through
her public address system. "Zia must go." This Independence Day had a
particular irony, she said because Pakistanis did not have enough political
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

283

independence to demonstrate freely. Smoke billowed from a burning bus only
two hundreds yards away as she spoke.
Anne Fadiman:
I didn't see a single act of violence committed by the PPP. All the violence
was coming from the police, who were beating the crowds to disperse them.
The young men held up their arms to ward off the blows from the lathi sticks.
When they saw Benazir's Pajero, they struggled to press their bloody forearms
to the windows, showing Benazir that they were willing to sacrifice themselves
for her. I suddenly saw the BBC Karachi correspondent Iqbal Jaffery running
along the edge of the crowd. "There is such violence," he called out to me. "I
just saw a ten-year-old boy beaten to the ground by the police for wearing a
PPP sticker." The police moved in with more tear gas in Lyari when they saw
Benazir.
Duck! Duck! I hear someone shout. Someone pulls me down in the Pajero
just as a tear-gas shell hurtles by my head. It is just like the attack against my
mother and me at Qaddafi Stadium. The police are using the tear-gas shells as
weapons, not to disperse the crowd. More and more police cars are arriving. "We
can't allow the party leader to be arrested in the street," one of the PPP activists
shouts. The cry goes up. "Stop the police. Stop the police!"
Barricades are thrown up. Tires and piles of litter are set on fire. We whizz
off again down the back alleyways of Lyari, our eyes and throats burning from the
tear gas. The people pelt the pursuing police cars with stones. "This way! This
way!" the people shout, saving us from dead-end streets. When we momentarily
lose the police, we flag down a taxi. There are clouds of smoke from the tear gas
and the bonfires. People are screaming. Police sirens are wailing. My Pajero
takes off again, Samiya sitting in the front seat with my dupatta on to draw the
police. Our taxi driver is so terrified he starts to take off with the door open.
"What's the hurry?" I ask him.
He drives very fast through the narrow streets, but he can't lose the lone
police motorcycle following us. I consult quickly with the PPP leaders in the car.
We need to have a press conference, but where? Various sites are suggested,
but I finally insist on returning to 70 Clifton. Though I will be walking right into the
grip of the police, I want to address the press in my own home and if I have to, to
be arrested there. But the motorcycle is still behind us. We have to lose it. "Turn
right," I suddenly tell the driver as we pass the lane leading to the Metropole
Hotel. He screeches in, around the hotel, and out the other side. We've lost the
motorcycle.
As we near Clifton, there are police blockades and police everywhere. The
driver panics and jams the car into reverse. "Just drive ahead normally. Keep a
steady speed," I tell him. "The police are not looking for a yellow Toyota." The
poor man is quivering as we drive through the police lines. I have Samiya's
dupatta over my face and the police don't spot me. We stop briefly at the house
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

284

of a party official to wash away the tear gas.
"What's the fare?" I ask the driver, getting out my wallet. "I'm not a taxi
driver. This is my own car," he says, still trembling. "You're not a taxi driver?" I
say to him in disbelief, remembering how I'd ordered him around. "No. I'm just a
PPP supporter," he says. He refuses to take any money and leaves.
The press are already at 70 Clifton when we arrive. In the midst of the
press conference, I get a message that the police have arrived. "Let them in," I
say. Three policewomen sheepishly enter the room under the eyes of the
foreign press and give me a thirty-day detention order, charging me with
unlawful assembly. After I collect my clothes and toothbrush, I am taken to the
police station in a huge convoy of police vehicles, followed by equally large
numbers of PPP vehicles.
At the police station I learn that six people have been killed at the
Independence Day rally in Lahore and scores wounded. Once more the regime
has sent its henchmen to do their deadly work. The dead and wounded have
been shot by sitting members of Parliament who "red Kalashnikovs into the
crowd. The MPs were never charged. Nor, I learn later from a Dawn reporter in
Lahore, were the police who stormed the emergency ward at the hospital and
beat the wounded as they lay on stretchers and handcuffed to beds. A maulvi
who was washing the tear gas out of the eyes of supporters in a mosque was
also not spared. The police stormed the mosque and beat him.
The toll is high in Sindh as well, sixteen dead and hundreds wounded.
There have been police attacks against peaceful demonstrators not only in Lyari,
but in rural cities all over the province. In the Frontier, too, Zia's forces have
attacked the demonstrators. And all for attending, on our part, peaceful rallies on
the anniversary of the birth of independent Pakistan.
I was placed in solitary confinement at Landhi Borstal Jail, a prison for
juveniles on the outskirts of Karachi. The police had arrested so many political
prisoners there wasn't room for me in Karachi Central Jail. Protests at my
detention spread through the country, prompting the worst unrest since the MRD
movement of 1983. Police stations were burned in Sindh, as were government
offices and railroad stations. In Lyari, PPP supporters battled the guns and tear
gas of the police for a week. The army joined the police in the violent
suppression of the protesters, leaving more than thirty dead. All of Mary Ellen
Mark's films of the rioting were confiscated.
International disapproval of the regime's brutal crackdown on political
expression quickly followed from England and Germany. In the United States,
Senators Kennedy and Pell expressed their concern, as did Congressman
Solarz, who was working particularly hard on my behalf. "If the government
continues to detain opposition leaders and refuses to allow peaceful political
meetings, then friends of Pakistan will be hard pressed in Congress to seek
additional U.S. aid ... in the months ahead," warned Solarz, the head of a House
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

285

subcommittee on Asian-Pacific affairs. But the Reagan administration stood by
Zia and his "civilian" prime minister Junejo. "He [Junejo] had the courage to face
down the opposition and ride out the foreign criticism," said a member of the
State Department.
Zia was quick to lend his voice to salve any criticisms from the allimportant U.S. Congress when he returned from Mecca in late August. "Miss
Bhutto is not the problem," he told New York Times correspondent Steven
Weisman on August 26th. "It is Miss Bhutto`s unnecessary, impractical ambitions
and her attitude towards acquiring power which is objectionable."
My case was to come up in the Sindh High Court on September 10th. The
Independence Day rally had been legal. And I hadn't broken any laws. As
thousands of people trekked from interior Sindh toward the courthouse on
September 9th for my scheduled appearance the next day, the regime caved in.
"I've got a surprise for you. You're free," the jail superintendent said, coming to
my cell at 9:30 P.M. But I wasn't surprised. I was already packed and ready to go.
Emotions ran high in the session the PPP held after my release to decide
what to do next. Some were keen to push ahead with the movement, wanting to
avenge the blood shed by the regime. For the first time, they pointed out, the
regime had killed PPP demonstrators in the Punjab. The momentum to topple Zia
had never been higher. We couldn't break it now.
"We have promised peaceful change through political means," I argued
successfully, urging restraint. "But the regime has resorted to force. Continuing
the protests now means more bloodshed, chaos, perhaps a loss of control to
extremists. Let us take August as a moral victory, and stick to our commitment to
peace." Shortly after the meeting I began another tour of the country, taking the
new message of cautious advance to the people.
I felt confident as 1987 dawned. I always feel that a new year will be better
than the last year, and there were many reasons for optimism. I was free in
Pakistan for the first time in six years. And after the long ban on political
activities, we were building the PPP as a political institution. Launching a
membership drive, we enrolled a million members in four months, a remarkable
figure for Pakistan, where the literacy rates are so low. We held party elections in
the Punjab—an unheard-of phenomenon in the subcontinent—in which over four
hundred thousand members voted. We opened a dialogue with the opponents of
the Muslim League in the Parliament and continued to highlight the human rights
violations of the regime.
Zia consistently claimed we were out for revenge, particularly in his talks
to the army, where he used that theme to spread fear of a PPP return. But our
party was speaking out not for vengeance, but for nation building. And
everybody knew it.
I called for Pakistan's need to build a professional army disassociated
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

286

from politics. I continued to criticize Zia's handling of the Siachin Glacier
incidents with India, where Pakistan had lost more than fourteen hundred square
miles of territory over the last three years. The crowds we drew seemed more
and more receptive. On a December visit I'd made to Lala Moosa to condole with
the family of a PPP activist murdered on Independence Day, members of the
army in this heartland of military recruitment had openly made the victory sign of
the PPP and waved to us as we passed. Once more, I was cutting too close to
General Zia's quick.
"We have information that the regime is planning an action against you," a
PPP supporter and former brigadier in the army told me when I went to Larkana
on my father's birthday. "We want to have a practice drill at Al-Murtaza to test
your security." Thousands had come to participate in my father's birthday
celebration on January 5th, a day that had gone very smoothly, and I did not feel
any more threatened than usual. "The security at Al-Murtaza is fine," I assured
the brigadier. "It should be checked," he cautioned. I was not alarmed. "There is
no need, Brigadier," I told him.
Another warning came in from Rawalpindi. Then another in Lahore. "The
regime practiced a mock assassination," a sympathetic member of the
administration told me. "The 'assassin' came right up to you, then reported back
that it was simple, that anybody could get close to you." I tried not to be alarmed.
Though death was always a possibility, I did my best to focus on political issues
instead.
The warnings escalated along with pleas from party sympathizers to
increase my security. One man in the Frontier Province wanted to give me six
men armed with Kalashnikovs, but I refused. I had never liked the concept or
display of guns, and had ordered my own volunteer guards not to carry weapons.
I shortly began to doubt my decision.
Within one week in January, there were two attacks on people close to
me. In the first, one of my security guards was fired on after the car he was riding
in was forced into a dead-end lane in Karachi. Only because he was
accompanied by men with arms who drove off the attackers did Munawwar
Suharwardy escape with his life. An MRD leader, Fazil Rahu, was not as
fortunate. On January 11th, he was axed to death in his home village. At the
same time, Bashir Riaz, my press officer and former editor of Amal in London,
started getting threatening phone calls in the middle of the night. Were all these
warnings from the regime for me? "Get in touch with the authorities," I told my
lawyer. "Let them know that if anything happens, it is their responsibility. We are
giving them advance warning."
The attack came on January 30th. I was planning to return to Larkana for
a visit but my departure was delayed by a last-minute appointment. I normally
drove to Larkana in the Pajero, but I also made plane reservations as a fall-back
position in case something came up. It was good security as well to have several
different travel plans. I often made plane reservations which I didn't keep,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

287

sometimes even double-booking to cities I wasn't going to so as to keep Zia's
intelligence agents in the dark. Often I didn't even tell my own staff my travel
plans so there would be no inadvertent slip.
"Bibi Sahiba, it is getting late," one of the staff said to me around noon. "If
you want to get to Larkana before dark, the cars should leave."
"You all go ahead," I told Urs. "I have a meeting and will come later." The
cars never made it to Larkana.
I was in the midst of the meeting when one of the staff came in with an
urgent note. I saw only two words—"shots" and "Pajero." Ironically, I had just
been talking about the attacks on my security guard and the murder of the MRD
leader. The timing seemed almost staged. "Excuse me for a moment," I said to
my guests. "There has just been an attack on my car." Quickly I gave instructions
to the staff to call the police and my lawyers and, pulling my nerves together,
went back into the meeting.
The story got uglier over the next few days as the facts unfolded. The two
vehicles were proceeding along the road near Manjhand in broad daylight when
a man waiting at the side of the road suddenly motioned. Four other men
immediately appeared and started firing at the passenger side of my Pajero. Urs
stepped on the gas and the Pajero, which was already going seventy miles per
hour, sped through the hail of bullets. When the staff looked back, the men were
still firing at my Pajero and had stopped the second car. The security guards and
staff in the second car were taken away at gunpoint.
A cold-blooded assassination attempt. Though the regime claimed it was
just a normal highway robbery, it was not. Nothing fit the pattern. The attack
occurred a full forty miles from the area frequented by dacoits, or highway
robbers. Dacoits usually attacked at night, not at 3:30 in the afternoon. And their
intent was to stop a car to rob the occupants, not to riddle it with bullets. I totally
discounted the regime's claim that the dacoits had launched the attack on their
own. Their mode of activity was to stop a group of cars, not just one, and the car
just ahead of the Pajero had passed the site without incident. The dacoits also
considered it dishonorable to attack a woman. No. This was not a simple robbery
attempt.
Disturbances broke out again in the country as the news of the
assassination attempt spread. The public outrage was so great that the regime
made a great show of sending its own inspector general of police to recover the
kidnapped members of my staff. Meanwhile, more and more information filtered
in. A man had been seen at the assassination site with a two-way radio around
the time the Pajero had left 70 Clifton. Someone must have radioed ahead to say
the Pajero was on its way, assuming I was inside the jeep, which has darkened
windows.
More stories came in. The night before, a man in a car had reportedly
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

288

approached the dacoits' secret headquarters and spoken to the chief. "Tomorrow
we have a very big job to do," the leader had told the others when the car left.
Other stories circulated about the threats the regime had used on the dacoits to
do their dirty work for them. Meanwhile, whoever was holding the PPP staff
members was not even asking for ransom. It was not a normal kidnapping.
The men were released some days later, as suddenly as they had been
taken. They were unharmed, thank God. But they strengthened our suspicions
about the involvement of the regime. "We are on the staff of Miss Benazir," the
men had told their abductors, who had already seen my distinctive jeep with its
PPP stickers, flags, and loudspeakers on the roof. "We are General Zia's men,"
their kidnappers had responded. No "dacoits" were ever arrested in connection
with the crime.
Another gauntlet of violence thrown down by the regime in an increasingly
violent society. The regime had armed the mujahideen, the fundamentalist
students, the secessionists, and the Muslim League. To protect his guise of a
"civilian" government, Zia had created private armies to gun down the political
opposition for him. Before the first month of 1987 was over, a PPP activist was
lashed in jail, in spite of the lifting of Martial Law, and more political dissidents
were shot. It grew increasingly difficult for me to restrain the younger members of
the PPP from resorting to violence themselves.
The situation in Pakistan was rapidly becoming chaotic, the London-based
magazine South reported in a February 1987 editorial. "The military has
exhausted its stock of credibility," the editorial read in part. "Now the government
appears to be losing even its administrative presence. The institution of
government, the army, the police force, the judiciary, and the executive agencies
are there, but they are all spinning like tops, each in its own orbit. . . . The
country is in the grip of tension and strife, factional, parochial, and ethnic. Law
and order has virtually broken down and it is the narcotic and arms mafia which
rules the life of the people."
Pakistan was verging on anarchy. Who needed an outside enemy? Zia
was destroying the country from within. The minutes ticked by toward the
promised national elections in 1990. But fewer believed that free and impartial
elections would ever be held.
The local bodies elections called suddenly for the fall of 1987 were a sorry
case in point. Forty percent of our candidates opposing the regime-backed
Muslim League had their nomination papers rejected. The contest, if one can call
it that, for the remaining 60 percent of the seats was even more manipulated by
the regime. Polling lists we knew to be false were not only never corrected, but
changed from day to day right up to the day before elections. Voting districts
were gerrymandered, with constituencies ranging in size from six hundred to
twenty-six hundred people depending on what would give a victory to the regimebacked Muslim League.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

289

The voting itself was just as rigged. Polling stations had always been set
up in public places in the most populous villages and towns. In these elections,
the regime announced at the last minute that the election sites would be in
sparsely populated areas and even in the homes of Muslim Leaguers, where
people feared to go. On election day itself, the regime changed the locations of
some polling stations without informing the opposition, making it impossible for
our supporters to cast their votes. Many couldn't get to the stations anyway. Two
days before the polls, the Election Commission requisitioned the jeeps, cars, and
other vehicles of PPP supporters to transport the election staff. The vehicles
belonging to members of the Muslim League were left untouched.
What a travesty of democracy Zia's elections were from beginning to end.
Yet despite the manipulation and rigging, the PPP was the only national political
party to emerge as a cohesive force. Once again Zia had underestimated our
strength and grass-roots support. Instead of holding the local elections in 1988,
as the press had speculated, Zia had suddenly and unexpectedly set the date for
November 1987. He must have been counting on the shortage of time to prevent
us from fielding suitable candidates, as well as my own distraction. Why?
Because I was just about to be married.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

290

14
MARRIED FROM
MY FATHER'S HOUSE
My personal life had taken a dramatic turn on July 29, 1987, when I
agreed to an arranged marriage on the prompting of my family. An arranged
marriage was the price in personal choice I had to pay for the political path my
life had taken. My high profile in Pakistan precluded the possibility of my meeting
a man in the normal course of events, getting to know him, and then getting
married. Even the most discreet relationship would have fueled the gossip and
rumor that already circulated around my every move.
To many Easterners, an arranged marriage is the norm rather than the
exception. But my own parents had had a love marriage, and I had grown up
believing the day would come when I would fall in love and marry a man of my
choosing. Still, inquiries about my marriage plans and availability had begun
while I was at Radcliffe. I came from one of the oldest and most well-known
families in Pakistan and was, by then, the daughter of the prime minister.
As an undergraduate in America during the flowering of the women's
movement, I was convinced that marriage and a career were compatible, that
one didn't preclude the other. I believed then, and still do, that a woman can aim
for and attain all: a satisfying professional life, a satisfying marriage, and the
satisfaction of children. I looked forward to marriage with a man who would
pursue his goals just as I pursued mine.
The military coup d'etat had changed all that. Although the inquiries
continued during the first few years of Martial Law, I refused to even consider
marriage at that time. How could I reconcile myself to something like marriage
with joy and happiness when my father was in jail and his life in danger?
The subject of marriage became even more remote after his
assassination. Traditionally when a senior or highly respected member of the
Bhutto family dies, no one in the family marries for a year. But I was so
traumatized by my father's death and thought of him as such a special person
that when the subject of marriage was again broached by my mother in 1980, I
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

291

said no. I wanted to wait for two years. Not only did I want to pay my own tribute
to my father, I couldn't think of marriage with happiness when I was so filled with
pain.
So many of my father's childhood stories to us had revolved around our
future weddings. "I don't want you to get married, but of course you will," my
father used to say to Sanam and me. "I'll be waiting for the day when you come
back and if there's one tear in your eye or one crack in your voice, I'll go to your
husband and beat him up and bring you home to me." He was teasing, of
course, but even the subject of marriage would remind me of my childhood and
fill me with sadness. I hadn't reconciled my grief.
By the time the two years had passed, I was in prison. Marriage then was
obviously out of the question. When I was released three years later in 1984 and
went into exile in England, the marriage probes resumed, but again I said no to
my mother. I was too nervous, too tense after the years of solitary confinement to
feel comfortable around any people, let alone a husband. Conversations, even
with my family, often made my heart pound and left me with a feeling of
breathlessness. The smallest noise made me jump. "I have to find myself before I
am ready to marry," I told my mother. "I have to find a relative calm. I need time
to recover."
Slowly but steadily over the next year in England, I began to mend.
Meanwhile the inquiries about marriage never stopped, different Members of the
family having their own candidates for me, my friends suggesting possibilities as
well. Soon before the family was to gather in Cannes in July 1985, my mother
and Auntie Manna approached me with a proposal from the landowning Zardari
family on behalf of their son, Asif. Auntie Manna, I learned later, had carefully
researched the prospective groom before passing on the request to my mother
asking the Zardaris to answer such questions as Asif's academic qualifications
(Petaro Cadet College, the London Centre of Economic and Political Studies),
his profession (real estate, agriculture, and the family construction business), his
hobbies (swimming, squash, and his own polo team, the Zardari Four), and even
whether he liked to read!
"Well, he can't compare with Benazir, but he does like reading " said his
father, Hakim Ali, a former member of the National Assembly and now vicepresident of the Awami National Party, a member of the MRD. Auntie Manna, an
old friend of Asif’s family, wanted a personal inspection of the prospective groom
as well. Asif was brought to her house, where he evidently passed muster,
appearing slim and smart in his polo outfit. Satisfied on all counts, Auntie Manna
then contacted my mother in England. But tragedy intervened again.
Within a month, my brother Shah Nawaz was murdered. I was shattered,
as were we all. I told my mother and my aunt that I didn't want to even think of
marriage for at least a year if not two. I didn't even ask the name of the intended
groom from the Zardari clan.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

292

Auntie Manna was determined, however, to pursue her candidate. When I
returned to Pakistan in April 1986, she kept badgering me to consider the Zardari
son, heir to the chiefdom of the one hundred thousand-strong Zardari tribe.
Originally from Iranian Baluchistan, the Zardari clan had resettled in the
Nawabshah district of Sindh several centuries ago, where Asif now oversaw his
family's farms. "He's very nice. He's in your age group. He comes from a
landowning family. His family is political. Families from the business class in
Lahore and Peshawar have approached me, but I don't think that's suitable for
you. It's better for you to marry someone from Sindh who understands local
customs and traditions. . . ." On and on she went, but I wasn't interested. For the
first time in nine years, I was enjoying my own country, free to go out and see my
friends, to travel, to work. "Just let me enjoy my freedom for a while," I kept telling
her.
But Auntie Manna didn't give up. Without telling me, she arranged for my
cousin Fakhri to invite Asif to a dinner party in November 1986, seven months
after I'd returned to Pakistan. She even made him wear a suit so he'd make a
good impression on me, instead of wearing the wild Baloachi robes he much
prefers, even on the streets of London. Auntie Manna evidently waited at the
dinner until there were only a few people around me to introduce him. When I
heard the name Asif, nothing clicked. I had no idea who he was and remember
only that we immediately got into an argument. Auntie Manna was more
concerned that he was sitting by me for too long and that it would lead to
conjecture. She sent someone to take him away, which was a great relief to me.
After spending all day listening to arguments within the party, I hardly wanted to
spend the evening arguing as well.
At the same time, I wondered what future husband would be able to
tolerate a life as demanding as mine. When I was home, my political meetings
often ran well into the night. And I was rarely even at home, constantly traveling
the length and breadth of Pakistan. What husband would accept that my time
was not my own, so it could not be his? Was there a man in existence who could
break with tradition enough to adjust to the fact that my first commitment would
always be to the people of Pakistan and not to him?
I was concerned as well about the feelings of the people were I to marry.
Because I was young and had spent so many years in imprisonment and had
had so much tragedy in my life, I had been told by friends that the people
thought of me as some sort of saint. The sacrifices my family had made for a
democratic Pakistan, leaving me to live alone without the protection of a father,
a mother, or even my brothers, had also led the people to think of themselves as
my family. A basic strength of the PPP lay in the sense of protection people had
for me. If I married, would they think I no longer needed them?
On the other hand, I argued with myself, remaining single could work
against me politically both inside and outside Pakistan. In the male chauvinist
society we live in, little thought is given to a man who remains a bachelor. But a
single woman is suspect. "Why aren't you married?" journalists often asked me. I
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

293

wanted to ask them irritably if they asked the same question of a single man, but
restrained myself. The journalists were not used to covering single women in
traditional Muslim societies, and the unusual circumstances dictated the unusual
question.
Still, inherent in the question, and representative of a whole school of male
thought, was the bias that there must be something wrong with a woman who
wasn't married. Who knew if she would make a reliable leader? What would she
do under pressure? Instead of considering my qualifications and the party
platform, the unspoken reservations were that a single woman might be too
neurotic to lead the country, or too aggressive, or too timid. This was especially
true in a Muslim society, where marriage was regarded as the fruition of a man
and a woman's life and children as its natural consequence.
Asif Zardari. Asif Zardari. Asif Zardari. Two years after his family's initial
inquiry, neither he nor his family had given up. In the past, my tactic with other
proposals had been to draw out the process for so long that the other person
either lost interest or thought we were not interested. But not the Zardaris. In
February 1987, I went to London to take part in a television discussion on
Afghanistan. Asif's stepmother unexpectedly turned up in London at the same
time to pay a call on her old schoolfriend, my Auntie Behjat. " 'Asif's so kind, so
courteous, so generous,' " Auntie Behjat reported their conversation to me. "
'Persuade Benazir to meet him again.' " Auntie Manna joined in the family
persuasion. "He's seen you. You're a real person to him, not just an image. He
really wants to marry you."
My mother added pressure of her own. "We know the family," she told me.
"He's thirty-four, your age. He's from Sindh, so he knows our customs and
courtesies. He's not a rootless phenomenon like the urban professional people
who can pack their bags and go anywhere. He's a rural, with commitments to his
family and tribe, so he'll understand your commitments too."
Her lobbying only made me more skeptical. She usually promoted insipid
types for me, claiming they made devoted and caring husbands, while those
more dashing and debonair would always be chased by other women and my
marriage would never be peaceful. I knew I would be bored to tears with the
insipids.
Auntie Behjat begged me to join her and Asif's stepmother for tea. I
declined. Even a meeting could be seen as some kind of commitment, and
though I was reconciling myself to the concept of getting married, the reality of it
filled me with panic. "Give me until June," I pleaded with my relatives. "I'm not
ready yet."
"How do you marry a perfect stranger?" I asked a friend in Lahore when I
returned to Pakistan. "Once you're married, you look at the person with different
eyes," she said. I asked another friend the same question. "Even if you've never
met him, you start to love him because he's your husband," she said. "You know
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

294

the saying: First comes marriage, then comes love."
I did some investigating on my own. Someone told me Asif had taken a
bad fall from his polo pony and would limp for the rest of his life. That turned out
not to be true, but even so it didn't bother me. A limp was not a character flaw. I
spoke with someone close to Asif who told me he was generous to a fault,
always giving money to his friends when they were in financial trouble. I liked
generosity. Another mutual friend used an Urdu saying to describe Asif's strong
will and loyalty: "He's a friend's friend, and an enemy's enemy," he told me. The
description reminded me of my brothers and was appealing.
For all that I was inhumanly busy, I was lonely at times. 70 Clifton is a big
house, built to contain generations of Bhuttos at a time. Al-Murtaza, too, is large.
Yet often at night, the only room with lights on was mine. I felt a degree of
insecurity about the houses as well. Neither property belonged to me. Mir would
undoubtedly remarry and return to Pakistan as soon as it was possible. What
would my position be in the home of my brother and his new wife? I needed my
own home, I decided.
I needed my own family as well. My sister was married and had a child.
Mir had Fathi, and Shah had Sassi. We, who had been the nuclear family, had
given way to other nuclear families. Where did that leave me in the swirl of all
these new families? Death, too, was weighing on my mind. Before Shah's
murder, I felt we were a big family, but when there were just three of us, the
family seemed small. With only one brother, the balance was upset. The idea of
having my own children seemed more and more appealing to me.
I had promised my relatives that I would meet Asif in June in England, but
a meeting with the Parliamentary Opposition Group in Islamabad delayed my
trip. When I returned from Islamabad to Karachi, I found a handwritten request
to call on me from Asif's stepmother. "Fakhri, Fakhri, what do I do?" I phoned my
cousin. "Meet with her," she urged. "If you like, I'll stay with you. Besides, you
can ask her about all those doubts you keep expressing to us."
"It would be such an honor if you would consider Asif," the impeccably
dressed Cambridge graduate said to me in the living room at 70 Clifton.
"Marriage would give you a new dimension." I restrained myself from saying that
a woman doesn't need marriage to give herself a new dimension and instead
proceeded to tell Asif's stepmother every reason why marriage to me would not,
in fact, be an honor for a man, but a nightmare.
"My life in politics is not an ordinary one," I told her. "I don't have the luxury
of calmly waiting for elections every five years. My Politics are a commitment to
freedom and the meaning of my life. How would a man feel, knowing that his
wife's life does not revolve around him?"
"My dear, Asif is a very confident young man. He understands what he's in
for," Asif's stepmother assured me. I rushed on.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

295

"I have to travel a lot, and I can't always take a husband with me "
"Asif has his own work, my dear, and won't always be able to travel with
you," she countered.
"I hear he loves going out to parties and socializing," I said. "In the little
private time I have, I prefer to stay home with a few friends."
"That's not a problem," she said simply. "When a man settles down he
likes to stay at home with his wife and family."
Feeling encouraged, I took a deep breath and broached the most difficult
subject of all. "In spite of custom, I cannot live with my in-laws," I said. "There are
political workers and meetings in the house day and night, taking up the living
room and dining room. I will need my own house."
"I agree, as does Asif," she said, unbelievably. "Asif's mother and sisters
will need privacy too."
Who is this extraordinary man, I thought. And I rescheduled my trip to
London, far away from the intelligence vans and the watchful eyes of the Zia
regime.
Thank God for the political appointments which occupied my mind in
London during the day of July 22, 1987. Not until evening did my stomach start to
churn with anxiety as I realized that there was no escape from meeting Asif.
Auntie Manna sipped her coffee nervously as Asif and his stepmother
rang the doorbell of my cousin Tariq's flat. I tried to look casual from the security
of an armchair in the drawing room, my heart pounding harder and harder as
each step of Asif's brought him nearer. They must have been excruciating steps
for him, too, though he looked confident in the one glance I gave him. Everyone
present talked politely of impersonal matters. No one mentioned marriage at all.
Asif and I didn't have a conversation by ourselves during the entire
evening. He was wearing glasses, and I couldn't even see the expression in his
eyes. I didn't have a single feeling about him at all after the evening ended, even
when he sent me a dozen roses the next day. The crate of mangoes he sent me
from Fortnum and Mason, however, along with a box of marrons glaces, my
favorite sweet, were delicious. So was the crate of cherries he sent to Sunny.
"What's the answer, Pinkie?" asked my mother, Auntie Behjat, and Auntie
Manna that morning, and the next and the next. "I don't know yet," I said.
I felt torn. I knew my friends in the West would find it difficult to understand
the peculiar cultural and political circumstances that were leading me toward an
arranged marriage. And there was also the personal side of the question. In my
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

296

position as the leader of the largest opposition party in Pakistan, I could not risk
the scandal of breaking any engagement or ever getting divorced, except under
the most extreme circumstances. I was being asked to make up my mind about
living the rest of my life with a man whom I had met only three days before and,
at that, always in the company of our respective families.
I introduced him to a few of my friends from Oxford. They liked him. I
introduced him to a Pakistani schoolfriend. She found him charming and told me
to marry him. Asif took my family out to dinner and I had to sit next to him. I kept
my niece Fathi, who talks nonstop, on my other side for protection.
The next day my cousin Tariq and Asif had a Man-to-Man talk. "If you
marry Benazir, you'll be in the spotlight," Tariq told him. "The tiniest thing you do,
even staying out late with friends, will reflect on her." Asif won Tariq over too.
"He understands the situation," my cousin assured me later. "He has wanted to
marry you for years. He knows exactly what it means."
"What's the answer, Pinkie?" Yasmin pressed. Every morning Sunny and
Mummy rushed to my bedside and stared at me meaningfully. "What's the
problem? What's taking you so long to decide?"
"I don't know yet."
Fate presented itself in the form of a bee. On the fourth day of the Zardari
visit, I took Fathi to Windsor Park while Asif went to a polo match. A bee stung
me in the hand. By dinnertime my hand was very swollen. "I'm taking you to the
hospital," Asif told me when he arrived at the flat. He ignored my protests, calling
for a car, arranging for the doctor, buying the prescribed medicine. For once I am
not the one in charge, I thought. I am the one being cared for. It was a very nice
and unaccustomed feeling.
Fate intervened again the following night during our search for an elusive
Pakistani restaurant. Mummy, Sanam, Asif, and I piled into a car with some other
Pakistani friends to go to dinner. We got lost. But instead of getting irritable or
impatient, Asif kept everybody laughing in the car. He was flexible and had a
sense of humor, I noted to myself, as well as being caring.
"What's the answer, Pinkie?" my mother asked the next morning.
I took a deep breath. "All right, Mummy," I said. Seven days after I met
Asif, we were engaged.
"Conscious of my religious obligations and duty to my family, I am pleased
to proceed with the marriage proposal accepted by my mother, Begum Nusrat
Bhutto," read the statement I released to the press. "The impending marriage will
not in any way affect my political commitment. The people of Pakistan deserve a
better, more secure future and I shall be with them seeking it."
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

297

The reaction in Pakistan was mixed. In spite of my statement, the regime's
agents lost no time in spreading rumors that I was giving up politics. Organized
gangs began stopping buses on the highways and pulling my posters off them,
saying they meant nothing now that I was getting married. "Why have you still got
the PPP flag up?" party workers were taunted. "Benazir has given up and left
you." The fears of the PPP supporters were further fueled by a false interview
with Asif's mother carried in the controlled press. "I'm going to invite General Zia
to the wedding," she was alleged to have said.
But many in the country were happy that I was going to live a more normal
life. The sweetshops in the cities were sold out for three days as the public
celebrated the event. "For ten years, we've been mourning. Finally we can
rejoice," the people were saying. Just as pleased were the Zardari tribe, fifteen
thousand of whom gathered to welcome Asif on his lands in Nawabshah, singing
and dancing and waving PPP flags.
When I returned to Pakistan, I traveled around the country, reassuring the
people that I was their sister and would always be their sister, and that my
marriage would have no bearing on my political career. Asif called me every
night, wherever I was, and little by little, I got to know him over the phone. We
had more in common than I thought. His family had suffered under Martial Law,
his father, Hakim Ali, having been disqualified from politics for seven years by a
military court and his crops on the family's 1,800-acre farm in Hyderabad ruined
after the regime cut off the water. Worse trouble came after the engagement
when Hakim Ali's loans for construction projects were suddenly stopped by the
nationalized banks. "You are making a mistake," people had told Hakim Ali when
our engagement was made public. "Your only son is marrying Benazir and the
whole army and bureaucracy will be against you." "I don't care," Hakim Ali had
replied. "My son's happiness means more to me."
Asif, I knew, was not interested in party politics. "One politician in the
family is enough," he had quipped to the press in London. But like many in
families with a feudal past, he followed local politics, and had filed nomination
papers for the 1985 elections. He later boycotted them on the call of the MRD.
And he, too, had felt the sting of Martial Law.
He had been arrested from his house in the middle of the night, the army
claiming they had found him traveling on the road with an unlicensed weapon.
Luckily for Asif, their false story didn't hold up even in a military court. "I only
spent two nights in jail. That was enough," Asif told a friend of mine. "I can only
imagine what Benazir must have endured."
He gave me a heart-shaped ring of sapphires and diamonds. He sent me
roses every day. We talked and talked. Our marriage really wasn't between
strangers, he told me. When we were teenagers, he'd watched me enter and
leave the movie theater his father owned. Two decades later, it had been his
idea to marry me, not his parents'. "If you want me to marry, then propose for
Benazir," he'd told his father five years back. He had waited patiently ever since.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

298

"Are you in love with her?" a journalist asked him. "Isn't everyone?" he replied.
We didn't really love each other yet, though my mother assured me that
love would come later. Instead there was a mental commitment between us, a
realization that we were accepting each other as husband and wife totally and for
always. In a way, I realized, that bond was stronger than love. Though I certainly
did not—and do not— want to be seen as an advocate of arranged marriages, I
realized there was something to a relationship based on acceptance. We were
coming into our marriage with no preconceptions, no expectations of each other,
other than good will and respect. In love marriages, I imagined, the expectations
were so high they were bound to be somewhat dashed. There must also be the
fear that the love might die and, with it, the marriage. Our love could only grow.
The crowds began gathering outside of 70 Clifton a week before the
wedding in December 1987. Presents began to be delivered to the gate, simple
handmade shalwar khameez from Sindh, embroidered dupattas from Punjab,
candy, fruit, and wedding dolls made to look like Asif and me. At times my
relatives went out and joined the people dancing with happiness. Women and
children came in and sat in the garden.
It is traditional for a prospective bride to remain in seclusion for one or two
weeks before the wedding, wearing yellow clothes and no makeup so as not to
attract the evil eye. But I didn't have time for this ancient custom called mayoon. I
couldn't afford to take two weeks off from work before the wedding. We weren't
even going to take a honeymoon.
We broke with other traditions as well, trying to set an example for the rest
of the country. The wedding was to be dignified and simple, not the weeklong
lavish affairs many families in Pakistan feel compelled to hold, often draining
their life savings and sending them into debt. Instead of the twenty-one to fiftyone elaborate sets of clothes traditionally presented to the bride by the groom's
family, I set the limit at two, one for the wedding and one for the reception the
Zardaris would give two days after the wedding. The bride's wedding clothes are
usually sequined and embroidered throughout with gold thread, but I requested
that my dress have gold either on the top or bottom, but not both.
Presents of jewelry, too, are part of the tradition, the bride often wearing
seven sets of jewelry running from a choker around her neck to necklaces
reaching her waist. I asked Asif to give me only two simple sets, one for the
wedding ceremony and the other for the reception given by the groom's family. I
don't live a life that calls for jewelry. How many necklaces can you wear to the
office? "You have your whole life to give me jewelry," I consoled Asif, who
wanted to give me the best. I even eschewed the traditional gold bangles that
brides wear on each arm from elbow to wrist, planning to wear a few of pure gold
and many of glass on each arm. I wanted people to say that if Benazir can wear
glass bangles on her wedding day, so can my daughter. I also chose to keep my
own name. I had been Benazir Bhutto for thirty-four years and had no intention
of changing my identity.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

299

"On my beloved's forehead, his hair is shining. On my beloved's forehead,
his hair is shining. Bring, bring the henna, the henna which will color my
beloved's hands." For three days before the henna ceremony on December 17th,
my sister, my cousins, and my friends gathered at 71 Clifton, the annex we use
for receptions and offices, to practice for the friendly song and dance
competitions with the groom's family at the mehndi. Samiya, Salma, Putchie, and
Amina were there, as was Yasmin, who had flown in from London. Every day
more old friends arrived from England: Connie Seifert, who had been highly
instrumental in pressuring Zia into letting my mother leave Pakistan on medical
grounds; David Soskin, Keith Gregory, and others from my Oxford days; Victoria
Schofield, whose visa was withheld by the regime until the very last moment.
Anne Fadiman and my former roommate, Yolanda Kodrzycki, came all the way
from America, Anne to do a story on the wedding for Life. "You came here to get
teargassed in 1986," I laughed with Anne. "It's good that you've come here now
to laugh and dance."
The wedding was a miraculous reunion of sorts, relationships that had not
only endured but grown stronger through all the tyranny of Martial Law. My
father's lawyers came, as did many former political prisoners. There was a stir
when Dr. Niazi arrived at 70 Clifton. Even though my father's dentist still faced
serious charges in Islamabad, he had returned for my wedding after six lonely
years in exile. He was safe enough in Karachi, but no one knew what he would
face when he returned to Islamabad to try to resume his dental practice. Through
it all moved my mother, anxiously checking on the details like any mother of a
bride. She had not been in Pakistan since her medical release in 1982 and, not
surprisingly, was having difficulty sleeping.
While friends and family were gathering inside 70 Clifton, thousands were
pressing toward Lyari in the center of Karachi. We were going to have two
receptions after the wedding ceremony, one in the presence of family and
friends, the other, a few hours later, among the people in the poorest section of
Karachi and a stronghold of the PPP. We had sent fifteen thousand invitations to
party supporters who had been imprisoned during the years of Martial Law and to
the families of the martyrs for the Awami or "people's" reception. The Awami
reception was to be held at Kakri Ground, the large sports field in Lyari where my
father had been the first politician to speak to and for the underprivileged and
where six people had been killed and others beaten and teargassed by the police
in the August 14, 1986, demonstrations. Sections of Kakri Ground were also set
aside for the public to join in the celebration.
The night before the henna ceremony I slipped off to Lyari wearing a
burqa to check on the preparations. Members of the Maritime Union and
members of other unions were putting the finishing touches on the fifty by forty
foot main stage at Kakri Ground, solidly constructed out of wood and eighty tons
of steel. Emergency generators were in place to light the grounds if the regime
decided to cut off electricity, as were twenty big-screen television sets placed
around the grounds to show the proceedings over closed circuit. Bowers of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

300

jasmine, marigolds, and roses were being put up around the seating areas on
either side of the carpeted stage for our two families and chairs were placed in
between for Asif and me.
Hundreds of strings of lights, red and green in the PPP colors, and white,
hung the length of the two-story buildings surrounding the grounds, and
spotlights shone on a huge painting of my father putting his hand on my head in
blessing. We were expecting one hundred thousand people to come to Kakri
Ground for the people's reception. At least ten thousand were already camped
there, some having walked or bicycled from interior Sindh. As my brothers and
sisters, they felt they didn't need invitations. They had come to a family wedding.
The sound of drums and wooden sticks. Women singing. Ululations of
greeting from my relatives. The groom's procession arrived at 70 Clifton on
December 17th for the mehndi, Asif's relatives bearing a platter of henna carved
in the shape of a peacock, complete with real tail feathers. My female relatives
placed garlands of roses around the necks of the Zardari entourage as they
moved into the garden. Asif was in the middle of the procession, his sisters
holding a shawl over his head. I was relieved that he had arrived on foot. He had
threatened to ride in on his polo pony.
We sat together on a bench with a mirrored back and inlaid with mother of
pearl at the top of the steps to 71 Clifton. I looked out through my veil at my
family and friends clustered below me on the side of the carpeted steps, Asif's
family contingent on the other. I doubt anyone had heard the likes of the lyrics
from my side as the singing began. Asif must look after the children while I am
out campaigning and not prevent me from going to jail, Yasmin, Sanam, and
Laleh, and other friends sang. "You must agree that Benazir will serve the
nation," they warbled in Urdu, then responded for Asif: "That is all right with me,
for I will serve the nation by serving my wife."
The guests, two hundred close friends, clapped and talked under the
colorful tent set up in the garden before moving on to the buffet tables. I saw
tears on my mother's face. I didn't know whether they were tears of happiness or
frustration over the number of foreign photographers who had somehow gotten
past security and were crowding around Asif and me. The mehndi was supposed
to be a family affair, but the press billing of the two-day celebration as the
wedding of the century on the subcontinent had brought press from the Arab
states, Germany, France, India, the United States, and England as well as the
wire services and, of course, members of the local press.
I so wished my brother Mir could be with us when we gathered in the
garden the next night for the nikah, the wedding ceremony. He hadn't been able
to come to Sanam's wedding either, nor had any of our family been able to
attend his wedding in Afghanistan. Mir had threatened to sneak into Pakistan for
my wedding, in spite of the danger of being caught by the regime and arrested.
My mother had forbidden him to take the risk.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

301

"Don't walk so fast. You're not late for a public meeting," Sunny whispered
to me through the pink veil covering my face as she and Mummy led me to the
wedding stage in the garden.
"Brides walk sedately," echoed Auntie Behjat as she held the Holy Quran
over my head and tried to keep up.
I tried to look demurely down at the ground as I took my place on the
wedding dais. My cousin Shad came up, smiling.
"What's taking the men so long?" I asked, wondering what was happening
on Asif's side, where the maulvi from our family mosque was reading the
marriage vows.
"Manzoor ah-hay? Do you accept?" Shad asked me in Sindhi. I thought he
was jokingly asking me if I was ready.
"Ah-hay," I replied. "Yes. But where are they?" He only smiled and asked
me the question twice more. "Ah-hay. Ah-hay," I repeated. Before I realized it, I
had consented to the three questions of the male witness, and was a married
woman.
Seven items beginning with the letter "s" surrounded me, as well as plates
of sweetmeats, nuts dipped in silver and gold, silver candles in silver candelabra.
Thousands of white lights spangled the garden, the light dancing off the silver
tinsel encrusting the dais. My female relatives held a green-and-gold diaphanous
shawl over my head when Asif joined me. Together, we looked into the mirror
placed in front of us, seeing each other as partners for the first time. Ululations
filled the air as my mother and aunts ground sugar cones over our heads so our
lives together would be sweet, then knocked our heads together to signify our
union.
Karachi went wild with celebration last night. Thousands pressed together
outside 70 Clifton for a glimpse of Asif and me when we moved to Clifton
Gardens for the private reception just a block away. PPP volunteer guards had to
struggle to keep a path open for our guests, who walked the few hundred yards
from 70 Clifton. When we left for the Awami reception in Lyari an hour later, the
streets on the way were just as crowded with well-wishers, jeeps blasting the
wedding songs which had popped up all over Pakistan to commemorate our
marriage. There were strings of PPP lights everywhere, festooning the center of
the roundabout where so many had been teargassed the year before, draped
from buildings along the route.
The crowds at Kakri Ground swelled to over two hundred thousand,
spilling into the streets. This was Asif's first taste of the love and support of the
masses for the PPP and he looked worried as the security guards urged the
crowds to open a passageway for the Pajero. There wasn't an inch of space on
the sports field, or room for one other person on the balconies of the buildings
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

302

that rimmed the field. For days women members of the PPP had been wrapping
wedding sweets into PPP colored boxes to distribute among the crowd at Lyari.
Forty thousand were gone in an hour.
Jiye Bhutto! Jiye Bhutto! Folk music floated out over the crowd. People
danced, cheered. Miniature hot air balloons were released, trailing streamers of
fire. A display of fireworks sent rockets soaring into the night air, while fountains
of silver and gold erupted on the ground. I waved to the crowd. They waved
back. It made no difference to their hopes and dreams whether I was married or
single.
"Today, on an occasion so personal and solemn for me, I want to reaffirm
my public pledge to the people of Pakistan, and restate my most solemn vow to
devote my life toward the welfare of each citizen and the freedom of this great
nation of ours from dictatorship," I'd written in a statement released the morning
of my wedding. "I will not hesitate to make any sacrifice, be it large or small, as in
the past. I will work shoulder to shoulder with my brothers and sisters—the
people of Pakistan—to create an egalitarian society that is free from tyranny,
from corruption, and from violent tensions. This was my goal yesterday, this is
the dream I share with you, and this will remain our unwavering commitment
forever."
Zia's intelligence agents, I'm sure, were among the crowd at Lyari, hoping
to be able to tell him that my marriage had diminished my support. But the
regime's hopes were dashed. "Now Zia won't call elections until Benazir starts a
family," Samiya joked with my relatives when we returned to 70 Clifton for a latenight supper. Everybody had a good laugh. Though Asif wanted a large family,
we had decided to wait. We wanted the time to adjust to married life and to each
other. We didn't know then how prophetic Samiya's words would be.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

303

15
EW HOPE
FOR DEMOCRACY

On May 29, 1988, General Zia abruptly dissolved Parliament, dismissed
his own handpicked Prime Minister, and called for elections. I was in a meeting at
70 Clifton with party members from Larkana when the startling message was
passed to me. "You must be mistaken," I said to the party official who had sent in
the note. "General Zia avoids elections. He doesn't hold them." Even when he
assured me that Zia had just made the announcement on radio and television, I
still couldn't believe it. "You must have confused the call for elections with some
other country," I said.
The congratulatory phone calls flooding into 70 Clifton and the clamoring
of reporters at the gate confirmed Zia's totally unexpected move. Many were
suspicious of the timing. Four days before, a Karachi newspaper had announced
I was to become a mother. "I told you if you started a family Zia would hold
elections," Samiya said triumphantly. "He thinks you won't be able to campaign."
I didn't know whether Zia's announcement was influenced by my condition, but it
did follow the confirmation that I was expecting. Though Asif and I had wanted to
wait before starting a family, we had been delighted with the unexpected news.
Now with Zia's melodramatic announcement, 1988 promised to be a year for
unexpected happenings all around.
No one had known of Zia's intentions beforehand, including Prime Minister
Junejo, who had just returned from a trip to the Far East and had held a press
conference at 6 P.M. An hour later, one of his aides who had heard Zia's
broadcast informed Junejo that he was fired. Zia gave four reasons for the
dissolution of the government: the failure of Junejo's administration to introduce
Islamic law quickly enough; the mishandling of the investigation into the
devastating Ojri munitions depot explosion in April which had launched missiles
and bombs into the civilian population; corruption in the administration; and the
breakdown of law and order throughout the country.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

304

Though I had little truck with Junejo, I felt sorry for him as he was
dismissed so peremptorily. Junejo had served Zia well, rubber-stamping Zia's
constitution, indemnifying all actions of Martial Law, confirming Zia as President
and Chief of Army Staff until 1990. But I quickly found that there was no echo of
sympathy for Junejo. "When you lie with dogs, you get bitten," some people said,
while others suggested that Junejo's epitaph should read: "The man who
tumbled into history and tumbled out of it."
Regardless, the mood throughout the country was ebullient. Zia's own
constitution called for elections within ninety days of the dissolution of the
government, and to many it seemed that victory was within reach. "No one can
stop the PPP now," said one supporter after another. I tried, unsuccessfully, to
plead caution. Though publicly I issued a conditional positive response to the
promise of elections—"If fair, free and impartial party-based elections are held
within ninety days, we will welcome it"—privately I had my doubts.
Free, fair elections meant the return of the PPP and the Bhuttos. Zia was
already on record as saying he would "not return power to those he had taken it
from." If he found it difficult to coexist with Mr. Junejo, his own creation, how
could he accept as Prime Minister the daughter of the man he had ordered
executed? "Zia hasn't dismissed Junejo to permit the PPP to capture
Parliament," I said, trying to temper the enthusiasm of our exultant supporters.
Zia's subsequent actions were to confirm my suspicions.
On June 15th, Zia announced the installation of Shariah, or Islamic law, as
the supreme law of the land. Because he did not define what it was or was not in
his television address, nobody was sure what it meant. Would currency notes
with representations of Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, be
withdrawn because some Islamic scholars consider the portrayal of the human
face un-Islamic? Would government bonds, which carry a fixed rate of interest,
be declared usurious? What it boiled down to was that any citizen could now
challenge an existing law before the High Courts as "un-Islamic." If the court
found the law to be contrary to Islam, the judges could strike it down. But why
had Zia waited until 1988 to implement Shariah?
Many thought that the timing of Zia's latest exploitation of Islam was
directed at me. The Urdu press was speculating that he could use the
interpretation of the law by Islamic bigots to try to prevent me, a woman, from
standing for election. Or perhaps he would try to use it after the elections to try to
disqualify me as the leader of the victorious party in the National Assembly. I
doubted that he would succeed. The Constitution of 1973, approved by the
country's religious parties, declared women eligible to become heads of
government. So did Zia's own Constitution of 1985.
More than ever we doubted that the elections would be fair and impartial.
In spite of Zia's declared intention to announce an election date after Islamic law
was installed, no date was announced. Nor did we know whether political parties
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

305

would be allowed to field candidates. Zia was up to his old tricks to avoid
meeting the PPP at the polls. But this time we had ammunition of our own.
In February we had gone to the Supreme Court to challenge Zia's 1985
Voter's Registration clause, which required all political parties to register with the
regime. Under Zia's rules, all political parties that wished to take part in elections
had to submit their accounts as well as their list of officeholders to the
administration's chosen Election Commissioner. Armed with that information, the
Election Commissioner could then disallow participation in elections of any
political party on such vague grounds as the party's being against the ideology of
Islam, regardless of the fact that the "ideology" was not defined. Just as
incredibly, the Commissioner could also preclude the office bearers from
standing for election for fourteen years and even impose seven-year jail
sentences!
Blatantly designed to keep the PPP out of the electoral field, the law
violated not only the fundamental right of freedom of association, but gave Zia's
nominee the right to recognize which parties could participate and which could
not. Fortunately for us, Mr. Yahya Bakhtiar, the former Attorney General of
Pakistan, who had headed my father's appeal team, consented to argue the
case before the Supreme Court. Eleven judges heard the case, the largest
bench ever convened in the court's history. The unanimous decision, handed
down on June 20, 1988, constituted a moral and legal victory for the people of
Pakistan. Zia's registration clause was struck down as "void in its entirety."
"Parliamentary government is a government of the party and a party
government is a vital principle of a representative government," the Chief Justice
wrote in his statement. "... At a minimum an election provides a legal means for
validating a claim to govern. It is a party system that converts the results of a
parliamentary election into a government." Agreeing with the Chief Justice,
another Supreme Court judge observed: "Persons elected to the legislature in
their personal capacities have hardly any importance. They just toss around on
the political scene, rudderless and without a destination. It is only when they
band themselves into a group as a party that they become a force exercising
some influence by their activities. Only as members of a political party and not as
individual members of the legislature can they achieve their objectives."
The intent of the Supreme Court in striking down Zia's registration clause
was clear: no party, registered or unregistered, could be prevented from
participating in elections. The court's verdict was also clear. Every citizen had the
fundamental right to participate in elections through a political party of his or her
choice. Elections had to be held on the basis of political parties. There was no
other constitutional option, even under Zia's own constitution. But Zia, we all
knew, was not one to hold himself accountable to the laws of Pakistan.
I was touring the country, traveling from Larkana to an enthusiastic
welcome in Jacobabad, then on to Nawabshah, where former members of the
Muslim League joined ranks with the PPP. Momentum was building in favor of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

306

the PPP, starting a bandwagon effect. When I returned to Karachi, more Muslim
League parliamentarians joined us. Potential candidates were all seeking the
heavy party support that the PPP's symbol on the ballot would bring.
There was increasing evidence that Zia's rash move was backfiring.
Reports were coming in to us that Zia, who had always been known to be cool
and calm, was losing his composure. "General Zia is acting in a very erratic and
unstable fashion," one political analyst reported to me. A retired army officer told
me, "Zia has always taken calculated risks but now he's acting like a gambler.
There is no logic to his actions."
Zia's sense of insecurity must have deepened when, in spite of the searing
heat and the summer rains, the numbers of people attending PPP public
meetings throughout the country swelled to many thousands. In Lahore, in July,
the press compared the crowd that came to hear me speak to the multitudes that
had welcomed me home from exile in 1986. Zia's nerves cracked. At a reception
that followed, a PPP loyalist conveyed a message to me from someone close to
Zia. "General Zia is said to be depressed, demoralized, and confused," he said.
"He is clutching at straws and is not sure what road to follow. My contact says he
advised Zia to hold the elections, accept the verdict of the people, and then to
leave the country. The contact wants to know your response."
This approach from Zia, later confirmed by others, was an effort to make a
deal with the PPP. The details, which soon followed, proposed a trade-off: Zia
would hold elections in return for immunity from any legal action against him and
his family. Certain countries would act as guarantors.
I refused. Not only did I doubt the sincerity of his offer, but I didn't see the
rationale in it. "Zia is trying to tarnish my image by seeking a deal," I told the
emissary. "Besides, I don't understand what he is afraid of. If he does hold
elections, what cause would there be for anger and therefore the need for
guarantors of his safety? The people are only going to be angry if he does not
hold elections." The discussion ended there, and there was no follow-up. I
continued to tour the country.
By the grace of God, I felt fit and filled with energy. "I didn't know you were
really having a baby," a woman doctor said to me while I was on the road. "We
all thought it was a political trick to get Zia to hold elections." I was surprised to
hear that many shared the skepticism all over the country. "People keep asking
me how you can keep up such a hectic travel schedule if you're really in the
family way," Fakhri said to me in exasperation. But there was too much at stake
to rest. If Zia upheld his own constitution, elections would be held by the end of
August.
At a breakfast meeting with the Australian ambassador at 70 Clifton on
July 20th, another note was handed to me. The elections, Zia had just
announced, were to be held on November 16th. While he admitted that the
Constitution provided that elections should have been held within ninety days of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

307

the dissolution of the National Assembly, Zia said he was delaying the date
because of the coming monsoons, the Muslim month of mourning (Muharram),
and the month of pilgrimage (the Haj). The tension that develops during
Muharram, Zia maintained, would make elections impossible. Ninety thousand
Pakistani pilgrims on Haj would be deprived of their right to vote if the elections
were held during the constitutional period. The rains had already caused flooding
in many parts of the country. I took his excuses with a grain of salt. His real
reasons, I felt, had more to do with my physical condition. Zia could not afford to
have me on the campaign trail.
But at least a date had been set, and we felt a measure of relief. We still
had no assurance that Zia wouldn't cancel the elections, or as to whether he
would hold the elections on a party or nonparty basis. The signs, however,
pointed to panic in the Zia camp. The Muslim League had disintegrated following
Zia's abrupt dismissal in May of Junejo and the National Assembly. He had to
woo back the very ministers he had accused of being corrupt and inept, including
his own Prime Minister, if he were to reunite the party against the PPP challenge.
In an effort to mend his fences, Zia had already reappointed nine of
Junejo's cabinet ministers in his interim caretaker government. Indeed, of the
seventeen new cabinet members and one minister of state, seven were sacked
members of the Senate and ten, ex-MNA's. Zia had even apologized in public for
"hurting the feelings and sentiments" of the former legislators by accusing them
of irregularities and corruption. This public apology was meant as a sop for
Junejo himself. Ironically, just two months after dismissing his Prime Minister, Zia
found he once again needed him.
In the face of the undiminished strength of the PPP, Zia's electoral staff
was also running scared. When I sent a representative for a list of voters from the
Election Commission in Larkana he was told to come back the next day. He got
the same answer on the next day and the next and the next. "Why are you
delaying matters?" my representative asked. The frightened official replied, "We
have sent a telegram to Islamabad to get permission. So far we have received no
reply."
Zia's fear of the PPP was demonstrated clearly on July 21st. Claiming that
party-based elections violated the spirit of Islam (though he had included them in
his own 1985 Constitution), Zia announced that the polls would be held on a
nonparty basis and the candidates would not be allowed to have political party
symbols on the ballot. Once again, the vast majority of the population would be
unable to identify those they wished to vote for. Instead, Zia's system would
promote influential individuals at the cost of dedicated political cadres who could
only win through party support.
Once more Zia had flouted the Constitution as well as the sentiments of
the highest court in the land. A newspaper report on July 31st clarified his
decision. Shortly before his latest announcement, Zia had summoned to
Islamabad the provincial secretaries from all four provinces as well as other
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

308

senior officials to discuss the polls. Because of the infighting in the Muslim
League, the paper reported, the leaders from Baluchistan, Sindh, Punjab and the
Northwest Frontier Province all felt that the PPP would have little difficulty in
sweeping the polls. The divided party, the leader of the NWFP reportedly said,
"will make it comfortable for Ms. Benazir Bhutto to earn enough seats to emerge
as the single majority group." Three days later, Zia announced the nonparty
elections.
Once again we turned to the courts. We filed a petition before the
Supreme Court in early August challenging the constitutionality of Zia's partyless
elections. But would a victory at the Supreme Court really help us, considering
that Zia had held the court's earlier judgment in contempt? As a dictator, Zia held
vast powers. Even if the Supreme Court decided in our favor, Zia could simply
issue a decree changing the Parties Act, or declare a state of emergency,
thereby nullifying the decision. He was thought to be setting the stage for the
latter already. On August 4th, the eve of the Muslim month of mourning, a Shiite
leader was shot dead in Peshawar. In the opposition we speculated whether the
regime, hoping to create the strife necessary for a declaration of emergency,
was behind the assassination.
As further protection for a Zia win, it was also being widely rumored that
new election laws were on the anvil whereby successful candidates could be
disqualified on the pretext of having any support from political parties. Sources
told us that the law would be enacted during the first week of October, leaving
Zia's opposition too short a time to challenge the law in court before the
elections. It was clear that the dictator had every intention of manipulating the
election results through partyless polls, intimidation, and stacked election laws.
As we approached the November elections, Pakistan hovered at the
crossroads of democracy and continued dictatorship. The people of Pakistan
were crying out for self-determination. Their voice was the Pakistan People's
Party. And Zia knew it. After eleven and a half years, he was still unable to hold
free and impartial elections for fear that the PPP would sweep them.
Facing the probability of partyless elections, we needed every solid and
well-known candidate possible. I was hopeful that my mother would return to
Pakistan to stand for a seat and that even my sister Sanam might be persuaded
to run. Regardless of the odds, the PPP was determined to challenge Zia through
peaceful democratic means, using the legal framework that is the backbone of
any civilized country. Bludgeoning the population into acquiescence with guns
and tear gas might win capitulation and resignation, but not the soul. Zia knew he
had never been able to win the hearts or the support of the people. Instead he
had ruled by terror and threat.
Just as a flower rarely blooms in the desert, so political parties cannot
flourish in a dictatorship. That the political parties managed to survive and
flourish for eleven years despite the draconian measures taken against them was
a tribute to those who gave their lives for democracy, and to the people of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

309

Pakistan who realized that their rights could be restored and protected only if
they banded together in a national party. We were, and are, the conscience of
the country, the future and the hope. Our day, I know, will come.
Karachi,
August, 1988

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

310

AUGUST 1988

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

311

EPILOGUE

There are moments in life so stunning, so unexpected, that they are
difficult to absorb. I had finished this book, in which I wanted to set down the
record of the brutal Martial Law regime of General Zia ul-Haq, when such a
moment occurred.
General Zia was killed in a plane crash on August 17, 1988, returning from
a military base in Bahawalpur in the eastern part of Pakistan. Thirty others died
with him, including the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, the vice chief of army
staff; eight senior officers of the Pakistan Armed Forces; Arnold Raphel, the
United States Ambassador to Pakistan; and an American brigadier general.
The news trickled in slowly. "A journalist has just called to say a V-VIP
plane has disappeared," read the note my secretary, Farida, delivered to me
during a late-afternoon meeting with party workers.
"What does this mean?" I asked her. V-VIP was usually a reference to the
head of state.
"It's General Zia's plane," Farida whispered, as if she were too shocked to
say the words out loud.
That Zia might actually be dead did not cross my mind. Instead, I thought
he had fled, remembering the offer he'd made just the month before to hold
elections in exchange for immunity for himself and his family. I could hardly
believe it. Had the Zia era finally ended?
"Get the journalist on the phone," I told my secretary.
The journalist nervously reiterated his message. "Zia's plane has
disappeared," he said. "Radio contact has been lost."
"What do you mean 'disappeared'?" I pressed him. "Has the plane gone to
Iran, to India, to Afghanistan? Did Zia go voluntarily or has the plane been
hijacked? What are the details?"
The poor man was too frightened to talk in anything other than riddles.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

312

"The plane didn't return to Islamabad this afternoon. There's been no radio
contact since it took off three hours ago."
Another call came in immediately, this one from a former general and PPP
man in the Frontier. "Something's up. The army is on the move," he said.
"Is it a friendly 'on the move' or a hostile 'on the move'?" I asked him,
considering the possibility that Zia had handed power over to the army before
fleeing or had ordered the army to take over the country while he himself was
still around.
"It's too soon to tell," the party official said.
Another call from a party member came through. "There's been an air
crash," he said. "Zia's dead, and all the generals on board are dead, too."
But I was still unable to accept the concept. After all the years of terror and
pain, it seemed impossible that Zia had simply ceased to exist. I had never
foreseen his end that way, though of course the possibility was always there.
This entire region is a violent one. His own reign had begun in violence, so why
should it not end in violence?
Still, it was difficult to absorb. I could envision Zia flying away, which is
how I saw the end of dictatorship. Marcos had flown out of the Philippines, the
Shah had flown out of Iran, Duvalier had flown out of Haiti. I always assumed that
when Zia's time was up, he'd take a plane, too, and fly out.
"I've just spoken to an army corps commander," the next caller reported.
"The plane crashed shortly after take-off in Bahawalpur. There were no
survivors."
I finally believed it. So did the party supporters who were already crowding
into the drawing room of 70 Clifton, people who'd been in prison or who'd been
lashed, whose families had lost their jobs or who had buried their dead without
seeing them. After asking my secretary to get in touch with the members of the
party who were in court for supplementary briefs on the election ruling and to
contact the combined MRD opposition, I went upstairs to my bedroom to phone
my sister in London. Sanam was out. As I left the message, the words caught in
my throat. "Tell her," I said, "that General Zia is dead."
As I said the words, I felt an enormous burden lift from my shoulders. After
eleven years of torture and harassment, we were free. And he was gone. Zia
could never hurt us again.
In a country where news spreads faster than flood waters through the
narrow streets and bazaars, the people were already celebrating. The sweet
shops were sold out in Lahore. In Karachi, the pan shops were giving away the
betel nut leaves for free. Within half an hour of the news reaching 70 Clifton,
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

313

hundreds were gathered outside the gates, raising chants and political slogans.
"How do you know about the crash?" I asked them. "The newspaper hawkers are
crying out, 'Zia is dead! Zia is dead!' " one told me. "Motorists are honking their
horns and rolling down their car windows to shout, 'Zia is dead!' " another said.
I was concerned that the national sense of celebration was unseemly. Not
only did I want to keep our behavior distinct from Zia's, but, as Muslims, we were
not supposed to rejoice in death. Many others died on the plane, and for their
families, the sense of jubilation was not right. My heart went out to Ambassador
Raphel's wife, Nancy, who, like me, had just recently married. Now her husband,
whom I had met and found very warm and committed to the idea of restoring
democracy to Pakistan, was dead. A message was sent to PPP leaders all over
the country to urge restraint. Under no circumstances did any of us want to
create a pretext for the army to take over and impose Martial Law.
We had first heard the news around 6 P.M. But there was no official
confirmation on the radio or television. As one hour passed, then another, I
feared the return of Martial Law. The chief ministers, all Zia's men, wanted to
cancel the elections called for November 16th, or at least postpone them. In the
wake of Zia's death and the national uncertainty, they were in a good position to
persuade the army to move in.
The tension was high at 70 Clifton. Rumors were circulating that all
opposition leaders were to be taken into custody that night. My husband
immediately declared himself chief of security and ordered me to remain at home
for the next few days. When I insisted on going out, there were a lot of fireworks.
The next day, Asif would temporarily resign in a huff.
It was not until 8 P.M. that we learned, with sighs of relief, that the civilian
path was being followed. Former Chairman of the Senate Ghulam Ishaq Khan,
Radio Pakistan announced, was taking over as President in accordance with the
constitution. When Ghulam Ishaq himself appeared on television to say that the
elections would be held as scheduled, we were even more relieved. That was the
first indication that the army was committed to restoring democracy to the
country. Ishaq, a former bureaucrat and key Zia aide, could not hold elections if
the army was not behind the decision.
My fears of a military takeover, however, had not been unfounded. At an
emergency meeting with Zia's chief ministers and the chiefs of the three armed
services shortly after Zia's death, great pressure had reportedly been brought to
bear on the army to declare Martial Law. To their everlasting credit, the military
officers apparently refused to allow the chief ministers to fire their political guns
off the army's shoulders. "If elections are held and Benazir wins, she'll hang all
the senior officers," the chief ministers warned the military men. "Her father didn't
take any action against the army, so why should she?" the officers had evidently
replied.
Zia's death was in fact releasing feelings of relief from surprising quarters.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

314

Calls were coming in from such army areas as Kharian and Wazirabad reporting
that people were walking long distances to the homes of PPP officers to
congratulate them on the end of the Zia era. It dawned on me that though Zia
was Army Chief of Staff and had always referred to the armed forces as his
"constituency," they were his "constituents" only by virtue of his office.
Though Zia had tried to keep the loyalty of the army through his anti-PPP
propaganda, our message of reconciliation must have been heard. "The army is
neither left nor right. It belongs to neither General Zia nor to Benazir Bhutto," I
had said in countless public meetings. "The army belongs to the people of
Pakistan."
But Zia had thought the army belonged to him and, basically, had held it
captive. It wasn't as though he had held a referendum among the armed forces
and asked them, "Do you support what I'm doing. Do you want to be involved in
politics and forced into confrontations with the people?" I hadn't realized the
depth of the strain the army rank and file had been under until the moment Zia
died. By making the armed forces a political arm of the regime, Zia had
undermined their professionalism and pride. There was little sorrow in the army
mess rooms in Karachi, an MRD member told me that night. In contrast, it was
reported after my father's assassination that soldiers in Kharian, Quetta, and
other cantonments had felt such grief that I. they had not eaten for three days.
As the evening of August 17th wore on, rumors abounded about the
possible cause of the crash of Zia's plane. Initially, the most popular rumor
involved a missile fired from the Indian border. The military base at Bahawalpur
was only sixty miles from the Indian border, and in recent months tensions with
India had mounted. Charging Pakistan with, among other things, training Sikh
radicals in the Punjab and sending them across the border, Indian Prime
Minister Rajiv Gandhi had declared in a speech on August 15th that if Pakistan
didn't behave, he'd have to teach us a lesson.
I tended to discount the missile theory, knowing our border defense and
military surveillance systems were strong, but I couldn't dismiss the possibility of
an "external hand." The Soviet Union also had a score to settle with Zia, having
warned him that Pakistan could expect to pay a heavy price for continuing to
support the Afghan resistance. The diplomatic corps and foreign press were
speculating that Zia's plane had been downed by the Khad, the intelligence
branch of the Soviet-backed government in Kabul. With Zia out of the way, the
whole Pakistani-American plan might go down the drain. The former had been
accomplished, but what was to follow? If the "external hand" theory was correct,
there was the possibility that a missile attack would presage something more.
The country was in an extremely vulnerable position at the moment. There
was no Parliament. There was no Prime Minister. The President was dead. The
top echelon of the army was dead. The country was operating in a vacuum and
ripe for subversion from without—or within. Indeed, some of our colleagues in
the MRD suggested that night that this was the time to strike, before Zia's forces
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

315

regrouped themselves. But I refused. It was not just a question of democracy,
but the country's security. Instead, I sent a confidential message to the
authorities through General Tikka Khan, the Secretary-General of the party, that
the PPP was a patriotic party, and in the event of a conspiracy against the
country, the PPP would not create conditions inside the country which would
give cause for more uncertainty.
The missile-attack theory was quickly replaced by the sabotage theory.
Suddenly the attention of the entire country focused on the army. If the cause of
the crash had been sabotage, who else could have engineered it but the army?
The incident had occurred in a military plane at a military airfield under military
security. Nobody knew Zia was going to fly to Bahawalpur except the military.
The theory swept the country over the next few days. Even in the areas that
were traditionally military, the word was "inside job."
I found these rumors very dangerous, not wanting the army to become the
subject of controversy again just as it was moving out of politics. For the first time
I found it difficult to talk to the press. They wanted me to say that I was delighted
that my enemy was dead and also that the army was responsible. Unless it was
true, how could I say it?
The theories surrounding Zia's death became more and more improbable,
ranging from the pilot's sacrificing himself in a patriotic kamikaze mission to
explosives hidden in the crates of mangoes given to Zia as a gift in Bahawalpur.
But the mangoes had gone through security like everything else. And the pilot,
who had flown Zia into Bahawalpur, had no guarantee that Zia would fly out with
him. There were always two planes at Zia's disposal.
A technical malfunction in the plane's operational system was not so easily
ruled out. Though the C-130 aircraft was one of the most stable and reliable
aircraft made, eyewitness reports of the plane's struggle to remain airborne for
over two minutes before nose diving into the ground suggested a mechanical
failure. "It's a one in a million chance, but that seems to be what happened," a
friend of Asif's in the Air Force phoned him after the crash. But even that couldn't
be proved. In the end, both the American and the Pakistani investigating teams
found no sure cause for the accident. Most Pakistanis, including me, decided that
Zia's death must have been an act of God.
Muslim children are brought up to believe in the wrath of God, a wrath that
can descend suddenly and without warning. Many people in Pakistan saw Zia's
death as divine retribution. To confront such an example of God's wrath,
however, was quite frightening.
The plane burned furiously for five hours. Zia had exploited the name of
Islam to such an extent, people were saying, that when he died, God didn't leave
a trace of him. The last rites of Muslims, bathing the body, the family viewing,
and turning the head toward Mecca while the last prayer is read, could not be
performed. The coffin that was buried at Shah Faisal mosque contained none of
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

316

Zia's remains. At a meeting of the Central Executive of the PPP the day after
Zia's death, the consensus among the party high command was that the PPP
should take at face value the words of President Ishaq Khan and hope that the
deeds would follow. We agreed to support the acting President if he took the
constitutional path so that we could accomplish the fulfillment of holding the first
elections in Pakistan in eleven years.
We were shocked, therefore, when Ishaq Khan kept the caretaker
government consisting of Zia's cronies and henchmen. Instead of a neutral and
impartial cabinet, these were the same representatives of Zia's corrupt system to
whom fair and impartial elections would mean the loss of their own power and
patronage. We called for their removal, as did many of the other political parties,
but to no avail.
One of the first acts of the caretaker government was to contact people all
over the country and offer them free tickets and free accommodations for Zia's
funeral. Surprisingly, few heads of state came, nor, more understandably, did
many Pakistanis. Zia went virtually unmourned. At the chehlum ceremony forty
days after Zia's death, it was said that only three thousand people attended.
There was some speculation, especially in the foreign press, that my
political determination and even the people's support for the PPP might be
diminished by Zia's death. For years people had interpreted my political
opposition to Zia as a platform for avenging my father's murder. But that was not
the case. You can't be fueled by bitterness. It can eat you up, but it cannot drive
you. The task—and my motivation—remained the same: to return Pakistan to a
democracy through fair and impartial elections.
In the weeks following Zia's death, the momentum toward the elections
grew. I was in meetings ten hours a day, meeting with the press, with party
officials and the components of the MRD to discuss which candidates to field for
the 207 seats in the National Assembly in the general elections on November
16th and the 483 in the provincial elections on November 19th. In effect, we had
to prepare four slates. If the Supreme Court decided that the elections were to be
held on a party basis, we could select lesser-known candidates who would be
strengthened by the party symbol. If the elections were to be party-less, we
would need candidates with high recognition.
Potential officeholders had flooded into Karachi seeking to become
candidates on the PPP ticket. There wasn't a hotel room left in the city. Almost
eighteen thousand people applied for the seven hundred National and Provincial
tickets. To break up Zia's political machinery, the PPP opened its doors to former
members of the Muslim League. Many of our former members who had deserted
the party at the time of the 1985 elections returned to the fold. I was asked by the
party to stand for three seats from Larkana, Lahore, and Karachi. My mother,
who would return to Pakistan to campaign for me while I recovered from
childbirth, was slated to stand for two seats, one from Larkana and the other from
Chitral in the Northwest Frontier Province.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

317

At the end of August, after a particularly long meeting with the MRD, I felt
ill, and the obstetrician did an ultrasound to check on the condition of my baby. It
had always seemed strange to me that throughout the pregnancy I had hardly
felt the baby move. When I told a friend, she said, "That proves it's a boy. Boys
don't move." I had voiced my puzzlement to the doctor as well, having heard
from friends that babies move all the time. "You're busy concentrating on your
work," he told me. "The baby is moving but you don't feel it."
The test proved otherwise, showing that I had too little amniotic fluid and
that the baby was hardly moving. Because I had spent so much time sitting in
meetings, the doctor told me, my blood was not circulating properly, reducing
nourishment to the baby. At the doctor's orders I spent the next four days in bed,
passing the time reading names for the baby to Asif from the Urdu alphabet.
From then on, the doctor told me, I was to lie down for an hour every morning
and every night without being disturbed and concentrate on feeling the baby
move. If I didn't feel movement, I was to come to the hospital immediately. Every
fourth day I was to come to the clinic for a fetal stress test. Have your clothes
packed, the doctors warned me, because I might have to be delivered by
cesarian section at any time. I was worried that they were so worried, and I sent
out an SOS to my mother through Sanam. Mummy was very concerned and
arrived two weeks later.
The baby's condition cast a strain over what was already a tense period.
Every fourth day I went to the clinic with Asif, choosing to go late at night when it
was quieter. The nuisance factor soon became just part of my routine. But the
technicians never found anything alarming, and I came right back home. For
three weeks I kept my normal work schedule, finishing the short list of
parliamentary candidates and moving into our new house.
During a normal examination on September 19th, the doctor told me I had
three or four weeks to go. I was not anticipating anything the next night when I
went in for the regular stress test. "You have to stay the night," Dr. Setna told
me after listening to the baby's heartbeat. "We have to operate early in the
morning."
I was somewhat relieved that the waiting was over. But the sudden-ness
of the doctor's decision and the late hour made it difficult to notify my relatives.
My friend Putchie, who had come with us to the clinic, rushed through the
deserted streets of Karachi to alert my mother and pick up my baby case and the
special prayer that Yasmin had given me to ensure a safe delivery. Putchie also
brought the merriam panja a friend of Asif's had given me, a dried flower to place
in a basin of water before I went to the operating room. As the flower swells to its
fullest, many Muslims believe, the pain eases. Asif stayed at the hospital through
the night, prowling up and down the corridor, concerned about my security.
Dr. Setna came for me early the next morning. "We have to hurry," he
said. "The people are already gathering outside the hospital." How did they
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

318

know? I had chosen to have the baby in the Lady Dufferin hospital in Lyari
instead of the more expensive, fancier hospitals in Karachi. The doctor I liked
practiced there, and Lyari had great personal significance to me. It had been the
scene of so many of our joys and sorrows. My father had spoken there last in his
political battles. I had been tear-gassed there, and Asif and I had our public
wedding reception there. The poor people of Lyari had suffered greatly under
Zia. We had shared much together. I thought also if I had my baby there, the
people of Lyari would have more confidence in the doctors and staff and would
come to the hospital for medical care. But how had they found out I was in the
hospital? Had the intelligence vans that still followed me reported it to the
different government agencies? The nursing staff put a sheet over my face so
no one would recognize me and wheeled me into the operating theater. In the
next room, Asif’s mother and a few other relatives read the Merriam surah of the
Quran, the traditional verses to relieve pain.
Asif was very keen to have a son. Almost everyone I had met in the last
eight months had told me I would have a boy. I suppose it was because the
people in Pakistan saw a son as a good omen. My father had three
granddaughters but he hadn't had a grandson yet. My child would be the first
Bhutto grandchild in our branch of the family born in Pakistan. Still, I had
resisted all this talk about boys. "What's the matter with girls?" I had countered.
But the talk persisted.
After a Quran Khani at my cousin Fakhri's house several months before, I
had felt something sprinkled on my head. "What is it?" I asked, brushing it off my
face.
"Congratulations," the women cried out. "You're going to have a son."
"How do you know?" I asked.
"We sprinkled salt on your head from behind," they told me. "You reached
for your lip, which signifies a moustache and a boy. If you had touched your eye
or your forehead, it would have meant a girl."
All the speculation ended on the morning of September 21st. "We have a
son," I heard my husband say with pride and satisfaction as I came briefly out of
the anesthetic. "He looks just like me." I went back to sleep and woke up next to
the sound of a congratulatory gunshot being fired outside the hospital, the
beating of drums and cries of "Jiye Bhutto." The most celebrated and politically
controversial baby in the history of Pakistan had been born.
We had purposely kept the date a secret, anticipating that Zia would try to
schedule the elections around my confinement. To pinpoint the date, it was
reported, the regime's intelligence agents had tried to gain access to my medical
records. But I kept them with me. Twenty-four hours after the regime's agents
calculated wrongly that the birth would occur on November 17th, Zia announced
the date of elections for November 16th.
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

319

But the baby outmaneuvered us all. Not only was Zia off by a month, the
baby actually being due in mid-October, but God must have blessed us by
bringing him into the world five weeks early. That left me almost a month to
regain my strength before the campaigning was to begin in mid-October.
Though smaller than my brothers and I were at birth, the baby was strong
and healthy, thank God. Right after his birth, Asif whispered the azan, the Muslim
call to prayer, in the baby's ear. Asif was captivated by our son and wouldn't
leave his room. I was happy that the baby would grow up as I had, sure of a
father's love.
Seventy Clifton was deluged with thousands of congratulatory telegrams,
letters, cards. All the flower and cake shops were sold out. Many of the hundreds
of cakes delivered to the house came iced in the red, green, and black colors of
the PPP. I sent on most of them, as well as the flowers, to political prisoners in
Karachi jail, to the nursing staff and patients at the hospital, and to the homes of
the families of martyrs. Asif sent others to the orphanage near the racecourse
where he used to play polo. There were stories and cartoons in the newspapers
about the baby: The Baby That Fooled the President. I put them in a baby book
for him.
Everyone wanted photos of the baby, including the foreign press. But Asif
was reluctant, protesting that nothing in our life was private. When requests
continued to pour in from all over the world, Asif finally gave in and we had an
official photo taken. When I flew to Larkana for the first time, one of the
passengers came up to me to say how thrilled he was about the baby. He took
out his wallet and there was a picture of the baby!
Because the baby was early, we hadn't yet decided on a name. Many of
the letters I got suggested that I name him after my father. But in Pakistan the
right to call a child by the father's name goes to the son in the family and I
wanted to respect Pakistani family tradition and continuity.
Originally I had wanted to call my baby Shah Nawaz if it was a boy. But
when someone said to me, "The next time I see you, Shah Nawaz will be born,"
my heart stopped. The picture came back to me of my brother lying dead on the
floor, and I realized I couldn't go through life remembering that scene every time
someone called out my son's name. Asif came up with a name, as did his mother
and my mother. I didn't object to any of them. "We'll ask a religious scholar," I
said. "We'll call him whatever is the most auspicious name." But the religious
scholar said that all three were auspicious names and equal in weight.
Then suddenly the name came to me—Bilawal, a derivative of the name
Bil Awal, which means "one without equal." In Sindh there is a saint by the name
of Makhdoom Bilawal who fought against oppression in his time. One of Asif's
ancestors was also called Bilawal. The name also echoed my own name, which
means "without comparison." So here was a name that touched the mother, the
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

320

father, and the culture and history of the land. Everyone agreed, and we named
the baby Bilawal. After recuperating for five days I went back to work, having to
be carried up and down the stairs in a chair. We were increasingly dubious,
however, that the elections would be held on schedule, or at all.
Devastating floods struck a suburb of Lahore on September 27th,
sweeping people, livestock, and homes away without warning. Outrage spread
when it was disclosed that the authorities in Zia's caretaker provincial
administration had purposely dynamited an embankment protecting a heavily
populated poor area—with no forewarning—to protect more affluent but less
populated areas of Lahore from flooding.
The waters rose anyway, cutting off Lahore and other cities and villages in
the Punjab for almost two weeks, ultimately destroying 200,000 head of cattle
and 500,000 acres of crops in fourteen districts. The Punjab PPP set up
emergency shelters and provided food and water for the thousands of people
who'd lost everything they owned in the floods. In the face of such negligence by
the authorities, and the disaster itself, it was felt that either the elections would be
postponed or Martial Law would be declared. But the army dashed the political
hopes of Zia's appointees by insisting that elections would be held on schedule.
The reality of elections receded again on September 29th, when terrorists
launched unprovoked attacks in Hyderabad and Karachi in a cold-blooded
attempt to undermine the democratic process. In Hyderabad, thirty hooded
gunmen armed with submachine guns and AK-47 assault rifles simultaneously
opened fire on innocent civilians in predominantly muhajir neighborhoods
throughout the city. Muhajirs, Sindhis, Pathans, and Punjabis were cut down in
the streets, the gunmen not even bothering to see whom they were killing. Nine
hours later, the carefully orchestrated terrorist campaign to inflame ethnic
tensions moved to Karachi, where assassins moved through Sindhi
neighborhoods gunning down residents. At one point they entered a bus and
killed passengers in their seats. By the end of the carnage, more than 240 were
dead, and 300 wounded. Schools, markets, and shopping centers were closed
as curfews were imposed in Hyderabad and Karachi.
I was sickened when I heard the news. Who was behind it? Because
Pakistan had been the victim of many foreign intrigues, one could not dismiss
foreign influence in destabilizing the country by the massacres, but one could not
discount internal motivation either. We felt there was a strong probability that the
caretaker administration, facing defeat at the polls, had hired dacoits to create
such a breakdown of law and order that the army would be forced to impose
Martial Law. But the army showed remarkable restraint, patrolling the two cities
to contain any backlash to the killings and to prevent the chaos from spreading.
On October 5th, the Supreme Court upheld my constitutional petition
challenging Zia's directive that the elections be held on a partyless basis. The
courtroom in Rawalpindi was packed as the full bench of twelve judges ruled that
all political parties were eligible to contest in the elections and that political
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

321

symbols would be allocated in the polling places to the parties rather than to
individual candidates. The caretaker administration accepted the court's decision.
What else could Zia's men do with the whole world watching? Spontaneous
demonstrations of joy broke out all over the country.
My initial feelings of safety after Zia's death, however, were soon dispelled
by new threats following the Supreme Court decision. A letter was intercepted,
apparently written by the Afghan mujahid leader Gulbadin Hikmatyar, with
instructions to his followers to eliminate Benazir Bhutto. Hikmatyar was very
close to Pakistani intelligence and could have issued the assassination order at
their insistence. On the other hand, the letter could have been written by antirebel forces who thought they could damage the mujahideen cause by
eliminating me and pinning it on Hikmatyar.
New threats were coming from inside Pakistan as well. We had received
reports that the acting caretaker administration in Punjab along with its allies in
Sindh were also planning to eliminate me. Zia's passing, I realized, did not mean
that the threats were over. Now that the PPP was in a sure position to win, the
Zia ministers wanted the PPP and me out of the way.
As the deadline neared for the filing of nominations, new political alliances
grouped and regrouped almost hourly. The squabbles and infighting which
traditionally marked Pakistani politics had further divided our greatest opposition,
Zia's Muslim League. On August 13th, four days before Zia's plane crashed, the
Central Executive Council of the Muslim League had met in Islamabad to elect
senior officers. But instead of casting votes, they had cast insults and epithets at
each other, the feuding for power descending finally into the throwing of furniture
and china.
Two weeks later, the Muslim League had formally split. One branch was
headed by two Zia appointees, a former governor of the Northwest Frontier
Province and the acting Chief Minister of the Punjab, Nawaz Sharif, and was proZia. The other branch was headed by Zia's former Prime Minister, Mohammed
Khan Junejo, and was anti-Zia. With the strongest opposition to us divided, our
winning the elections was almost ensured.
Unfortunately, the coalition between the MRD and PPP also dissolved. As
we tried to decide together which candidates to put up, it became increasingly
apparent that many of the MRD candidates were too weak to defeat their Muslim
League counterparts. Furthermore, the MRD refused to commit to forming a
coalition government with us after the elections, insisting instead on keeping their
options open. We parted company with the MRD with regret. Still, we assured the
MRD that, on principle, we would not mount PPP candidates against them in the
home constituencies of the MRD leaders. The principle would not be
reciprocated.
In the face of a united and strong PPP, the political maneuvering
accelerated. The pro-Zia branch of the Muslim League formed a coalition called
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

322

the Islami Jamhoori Ittehad with seven other religious and political parties to run
under a single banner and electoral political symbol. At the eleventh hour, on the
day before the October 15th deadline for filing nominations, Junejo and his
branch of the Muslim League also joined the IJI. Now we were facing a coalition
of nine political parties.
It seemed ironic to us that the parties felt it necessary to band together to
face the PPP. Coalitions traditionally have been formed against the party in
power. For the first time the party in power formed a coalition against us, the
opposition, to call in every possible vote they could get.
But even that wasn't enough. To further stack the odds against us, the
acting President unilaterally and unconstitutionally passed a decree changing the
election laws in a bid to disqualify and disenfranchise our supporters. The decree
declared that, for the first time, all voters had to show National Identity Cards to
vote. When we protested, the administration claimed that "103 percent" of
Pakistani voters already had identity cards!
Mathematical impossibilities aside, we knew better. Among the rural
voters who formed much of the PPP's strength, only 5 percent of the women and
30 percent of the men had identity cards. Not only was there a shortage of forms
to apply for new or replacement cards, but at best, the registration officer in one
rural area told us, he could only process three hundred cards a day. This meant
that in the two weeks before the elections, fewer than four thousand cards could
be issued, and many of those were useless. Some politically motivated election
officials were validating the cards of PPP supporters for use after the election.
The caretaker administration's insistence on ID cards cast a pall on our
hopes for a fair election. ID cards had not been required to vote during the 1984
referendum, the 1985 nonparty election, or the 1987 local bodies elections. Then
the lists of registered voters in every province had been enough. Why should ID
cards be demanded now if not to undermine the overwhelming numbers of PPP
votes expected at the polls? Whereas before Zia had controlled the verdict of the
people by banning political parties, now his wards were defrauding the nation by
barring the voters. When Zia was alive, political candidates were disqualified.
Under his henchmen, the voters were being disqualified.
Once again we turned to the court, entering a petition that challenged the
constitutionality of the ID card requirement. And I turned my attention to the
campaign. My father had campaigned for the PPP by train, and now so did I,
traveling from Karachi to Lahore on the Khyber Mail. Since the election
commission had disallowed our traditional and well-known symbol of the sword,
for this electoral battle we had chosen a new weapon—the arrow.
The caretaker administration had forbidden all candidates from using radio
or television spots before the elections, so I used the train's scheduled stops to
encourage our supporters to come out to the polls. In between stops I met with
local PPP leaders who got on at one station and got off at the next. "Zalem o ke
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

323

dil may teer, Benazir, Benazir! The arrow in the heart of the tyrants, Benazir,
Benazir!" the jubilant crowds shouted, showering the train with garlands of roses
and passing food and water up to the party workers crowded into the car. I
gulped hot tea and medicines after every stop, fighting a kidney infection which
had sidelined me at the beginning of the campaign. Asif, who had never traveled
with me before, accompanied me on this first leg of the campaign, as did many
overenthusiastic PPP supporters who climbed to the top of the train and rode
along with us. We could see their shadows cast on the green fields of Punjab as
they danced and sang. At a night stop at Mian Channu, a farming area, I almost
got left behind on the platform when the engineer pulled out of the station early.
The crowds came to my rescue by lying across the tracks.
The best news greeted me a week later during our train tour of Sindh, the
day after over forty members of the traveling PPP entourage had spent the night
at Asif's family house in Nawabshah. On November 8th, the Lahore High Court
struck down the ID card requirement and upheld the constitutional right of all
registered Pakistani voters over twenty-one with proper identification to vote. The
number of ID cards officially in circulation in one constituency in Lahore, the court
noted, was almost double the number of registered voters. Moreover, the ID
cards issued to women did not have photographs or signatures, lending a greater
possibility of voting fraud. In view of these facts and irregularities, the court ruled,
requiring IDs would inhibit, rather than ensure, fair elections. Quick to react, Zia's
men appealed the decision to the Supreme Court.
The expectations of the crowds reached new heights following the victory
for fair elections in the Lahore High Court. "Ali Baba may be gone, but the forty
thieves remain," my mother called to the cheering throngs at her public meeting
in Larkana on November 10th. "You know who they are. Vote the arrow on
November 16th." On the same day in Rawalpindi, the crowds greeting me broke
the records set upon my return to Pakistan in 1986. The hundreds of thousands
of supporters escorting the PPP procession into the city filled all the streets,
bringing the traffic system to the verge of collapse. It took us close to three hours
to advance one kilometer. "You have to choose between those who support
dictatorship and those who support democracy," I called to the multitudes when I
finally reached the public meeting grounds. "You have to choose between
reactionaries who want to suppress the people and the PPP which wants to
break the chains of suppression."
The excitement was palpable as we moved on through the Punjab during
the last few days of the campaign. There have been only two general elections in
Pakistan since its birth forty-one years ago. The first brought my father and the
PPP to the leadership of West Pakistan. In 1977, the PPP government was
reelected. This election will be third, and the toughest.
The leaders of Zia's Muslim League have publicly declared that they will
not accept a Bhutto as leader of the government, regardless of the outcome of
the November 16th elections. The fundamentalist Jamaat-e-Islami party is
trumpeting that leadership by a woman is un-Islamic, although they declared it
Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

324

Islamic in Zia's constitution of 1985. Even Ahmed Raza Kasuri, the minor
politician who conspired with General Zia in the judicial murder of my father nine
years ago, has been trotted out again by the Zia league, this time accompanied
by Ijaz ul-Haq, the eldest son of General Zia. The PPP campaign, Ijaz ul-Haq
claimed unbelievably in the press, is being masterminded by a "Jewish company
in London."
Meanwhile, the Supreme Court is about to begin deliberating the
constitutionality of the identity card requirement, which, if imposed, will
disenfranchise roughly 55 percent of the registered voting population. The
outcome looks ominous. "We saw the size of your crowds in Rawalpindi," a
Supreme Court judge confided to one of our lawyers on the eve of the hearing.
"We can't allow a landslide for the PPP."
In the face of such uncertainty and opposition, the loyalty of PPP
supporters has never been stronger. Faisal Hayat, who was tortured in the
Lahore Fort under Zia's Martial Law, is standing for a seat in the National
Assembly. So is his uncle, Khalid Ahmed, among the first civil servants arrested
by Zia, now returned from exile. Jehangir Badar, Pervez Ali Shah, former deputy
speaker of the National Assembly Dr. Ashraf Abbasi, and my father's lawyer,
former Attorney General Mr. Yahya Bakhtiar, are standing, as are hundreds of
other PPP party members who were imprisoned and lashed in their quest for
democracy. Standing alongside them will be the martyrs who gave their lives for
freedom.
Whether the PPP wins or loses the election, we have won the possibility,
at least, of the return of Pakistan to democracy. Our pain has not been in vain.
Nor have we deviated from our principles. "Wazir-e-Azam, Benazir! Prime
Minister Benazir!" the people are calling out to me as I end my campaign in all
four provinces. "Bhutto family hero, hero, all the rest are zero, zero!" they call out
to my mother as she winds up her own campaign schedule, suffering from
heatstroke and fever.
We will go together to Al-Murtaza in our home constituency of Larkana to
cast our votes on November 16th. After voting I plan to pay my respects at the
grave of my father, the only Prime Minister so far in Pakistan's history to be
elected directly by the people. We are generations of politicians, devoted to an
egalitarian and progressive Pakistan. The rest is in God's hands.
En route to Faisalabad,
November 10, 1988

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

325

EDITOR'S OTE
On November 12, 1988, the Supreme Court stayed the decision of the
Lahore High Court. All Pakistani voters were therefore required to show national
identity cards to vote in the upcoming elections.
On November 16th, despite the disenfranchisement of more than half the
voting population, Benazir Bhutto and her mother, Nusrat Bhutto, led the
Pakistan People's Party to victory at the polls. The PPP swept the province of
Sindh, not conceding a single seat to its opponents in the IJI coalition, and
scored a clear majority in the Punjab. The only party to win electoral contests in
all four provinces, the PPP won a total of 92 seats in the National Assembly to
the IJI's 54.
All the top leaders associated with the late General Zia ul-Haq's regime
were defeated by the voters, including Prime Ministerial hopeful Mohammed
Khan Junejo. IJI chairman Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi was also defeated, while acting
Governor of the Punjab Nawaz Sherif lost two of the four seats he was
contesting. In contrast, Bhutto and her mother won all five of their constituent
seats in Sindh, Punjab, and the Northwest Frontier provinces, securing the
highest margins of victory of any individual candidates in Pakistan's history.
On November 19th, the PPP won the electoral contest for the Provincial
Assembly as well, securing 184 seats to the IJI's 145. Again, Zia's former
ministers and assembly members were toppled all over Pakistan.
Democracy returned to Pakistan on December 1st, when acting president
Ghulam Ishaq Khan named Benazir Bhutto Prime Minister and called on her to
form a government. At thirty-five, Bhutto became one of the youngest heads of
state in the world and the first woman to lead a Muslim nation. Shortly after being
sworn in as Prime Minister, Bhutto announced an amnesty for all remaining
political prisoners jailed under General Zia's regime.
On December 5, the French court in Grasse sentenced Rehana Bhutto, widow
of the prime minister's brother, Shah Nawaz, to two years in prison for failure to
assist a person in danger. As anticipated, Mrs. Bhutto did not attend the trial and
was sentenced in absentia. A warrant has been issued for her arrest.

Daughter of Destiny, Copyright © www.bhutto.org

326

