NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE

TRENT UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

ZAMBIA SHALL BE FREE

■v

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2019 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/zambiashallbefreOOOOkaun

Kenneth D. Kaunda

ZAMBIA SHALL BE FREE
An Autobiography

LONDON

MELBOURNE

TORONTO

IBADAN

© Kenneth D. Kaunda 1962
All Rights Reserved

First published 1962

Published by
Heinemann Educational Books Ltd
15-16 Queen Street, Mayfair, London W.i
Printed in Great Britain by
The Windmill Press Ltd, Kingswood, Surrey

ONULP

Contents
Foreword

i

Boyhood at Lubwa

5

Schooldays at Munali

12

3

Schoolmaster

18

4

My Wandering Days

23

5
6

Colour Bar

31

I Decide to go Home

36

7

Harry Nkumbula as Leader

45

8 Organizing Secretary, Northern Province

52

Secretary-General of Congress

55

10

A Time of Frustration

60

11

African Opinion

71

12

Visit to the United Kingdom

80

U

I Split with Harry Nkumbula

88

M

Arrest and Detention

104

Prison

121

16

U.N.I.P. and the Church

137

x7

A Year of Decision

151

Appendix

I

A Historical Note

161

Appendix

II

Memorandum on Representation

166

Appendix III

Comments on Proposals

176

Appendix IV

Gwembe Valley Disturbances

186

\J\

9

197

Index

44738

FOREWORD

I have known Mr Kaunda for many years. The other day
he introduced me, saying ‘Here is Sir Stewart Gore-Browne,
who has lived in Africa longer than I have’.
I first came to Northern Rhodesia fifty years ago and have
lived at Shiwa Ng’andu for forty years. It is my home and
that of my children and grandchildren. For nearly fifteen
years I represented African interests in the Northern
Rhodesia Legislature, a job which involved travelling
throughout the length and breadth of the country. Mr
Kaunda and I have always been friends, so if anything I
can write will help him I am only too pleased to do so.
I have read his book and it represents very fairly his own
point of view. What is even more significant, I think it is
now fair to say that it represents the feelings of the great
majority of sensible people, European as well as African, in
Northern Rhodesia.
Stewart Gore-Browne

London
May, 1962

CENTRAL AFRICAN FEDERATION

I

Boyhood at Lubwa

My parents gave me the name Buchizya, meaning ‘the un¬
expected one’, for I was born in the twentieth year of their
marriage, the eighth in the line of children, three of whom
died young. I was born in 1924 at Lubwa in the hills of the
watershed between the great Luangwa and Chambezi rivers.
My father, David Kaunda, was the first African missionary
to be sent by the Livingstonia Mission of Nyasaland in 1904
to the Bemba-speaking people of the Chinsali District of
Northern Rhodesia. For many years, he and my mother
made their faithful witness among the Bemba, winning the
confidence of the Chiefs and people. The Mission Station at
Lubwa, eight miles from Chinsali, was not built until the
pioneer missionary Mr McMinn came to join him.
My father died when I was eight years old and I cried bit¬
terly when I heard of his death, for I loved him and all my
memories of him are sweet ones. He was a strict man, always
expecdng to be obeyed without question. He ruled his
family with a firm hand but only once did he beat me. Until
the day I die I do not think I shall forget that beating my
father gave me. I was sore for days afterwards and he had
to treat me with some soothing medicines. For an advocate
5

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

of non-violence, this is not an edifying story to tell, but peihaps it was that early disapproval by my father that taught
me not to fight with my brother man. It is so long ago that
I forget now what the quarrel was about. All I remember is
that I was very angry over something with the young son
of the schoolmaster at Lubwa. He was just my age and for
the first time in my life I went for him and in a moment I
had him on the ground sitting astride him and rained blows
upon his head. As luck would have it my father came by and
saw me belabouring his colleague’s son. That was the end of
the fight and the cause of the beating, and each time my
father applied his healing medicines, he rubbed into my small
childish mind the wickedness of fighting. On only two other
occasions in my life have I given way to violence but I must
reserve those stories for later chapters in my life.
My father was for many years headmaster of the school but,
in later life, he was ordained as a minister of the church. This
responsibility meant that he frequently went off on tours
round the villages visiting his people. My dearest memories
of him concern the family hour before he departed on these
tours. He would call my mother and my brothers and sisters
and we would sing some hymns and he would pray with us.
How I loved to sing with him. Indeed, my mother has often
told me that as a very young child I would stand up on these
occasions to imitate him as he beat time to the music. The
sweet music of those hymns in the soft language of Bemba,
my mother tongue, gave me my first love of singing which
has never left me.
My father was a fine preacher, though I remember none of
his sermons since, as a child, we always came out of the
church before the preaching began. I think he must some¬
times have preached sermons which did not please the
6

BOYHOOD

AT

LUBWA

missionaries, because I have a vivid memory of once playing
in the sand outside my father’s house after a Sunday morn¬
ing service, of being conscious that Father was sitting on the
veranda at a table discussing something with Mr McMinn,
Rev. Maxwell Robertson and Dr Brown. Suddenly I was
starded by a loud bang and looking round I saw that it
was my father who had thumped the table; he had
jumped to his feet and was speaking animatedly to the mis¬
sionaries.
Lubwa, set among the lovely hills of Chinsali in the
Northern Province of Northern Rhodesia, was a good place
in which to live. Old Mr McMinn, whom we called Shikulu
- ‘grandfather’ - my own father and the other missionaries
had created out of nothing a busy community of order and
peace, which I look back upon with a deep thankfulness,
realizing how much I owe to my early training in that place.
Although we were five children in the family, I never re¬
member sitting down to a meal with just ourselves present.
There were always numerous guests and visitors in our
home. During the term time there were always boys with
us, sons of my father’s friends who could not find school
fees and whom my parents out of kindness had taken in.
An early memory comes back to me of seeing some bowls of
food set out in preparation for a meal, and while the guests
gathered round they were startled by the sound of roaring
in the forest near by. Someone laughingly said it was a
notorious practical joker who could imitate the roar of a
lion by vibrating a kind of root in a drum, but suddenly the
roaring came nearer and no one could mistake it for any¬
thing but the roaring of a lion. Panic gripped everyone. My
elder brother grabbed me by the hand and I was dragged
along, hardly able to touch the ground with my scampering
7

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

toes, so eager was my brother to get me to the safety of a
neighbour’s house.
My parents could never have entertained so many guests
and visitors in our home, on the meagre salary of a minister,
had they not made big gardens for growing food. My mother
made soap which she gave to those who helped with dig¬
ging and weeding. Ten miles away they grew rice in a river¬
bed and not far from Lubwa they cultivated a large area of
land. Their generous hospitality became famous and their
home was known everywhere as Galilee - the place of peace
and rest. The land in the Northern Province is very poor
and the only way of getting a crop of any kind is by the
system of chitememe. In the dry season, the men go out with
their axes into the forest and, climbing the trees, they lop
off the branches. These are then stacked in long piles and
burnt before the coming of the rains. The BaBemba are
the most expert tree climbers in Northern Rhodesia and
there is great art in the way the branches are stacked before
burning, for if they do not burn slowly and burn away com¬
pletely, the soil beneath the fires is not sterilized and, when
the seeds are planted in the ash, the weeds grow up and
choke the millet. Only in this way has it been found pos¬
sible to get a crop from the ground. There was no shortage
of land to cultivate in the Northern Province and we did not
kill the trees by lopping off the branches. Over the years,
the bush regenerated and could be cultivated again. My
people, through long ages of trial and error, had learnt how
to live with Nature and win a living from the infertile soil.
After my father’s death, my mother expected every one of
her children to help her in keeping house and home to¬
gether. Though I was a boy, I was made to do every type of
work around the house and in the gardens. I learnt to carry

8

BOYHOOD

AT

LUBWA

water from the well two miles away - we were never allowed
to make any excuse for not washing because there was no
water - and my mother insisted on us stripping for a bath
every day. I learnt to kneel by the grinding stone and grind
the millet for the evening meal. I learnt to sweep and clean
the cooking pots and wash my own clothes and iron them
as well. There was firewood to be gathered from the forest
and always work to be done in carrying poles to build the
grain bins and the chicken houses.
My father had planned for me the best education possible
which, at that time, could only be obtained in South Africa.
He planned to send me as soon as I had received my basic
education to live with Z. K. Mathews, but of course that was
not to be. The method of teaching young children in the
nineteen-twenties was to gather them under a tree on which
was hung a cloth painted with the letters of the alphabet. I
well remember sitting for hours under a shady tree chanting
‘a-e-i-o-u’, then forming the letters with my finger in the
sand. We would smooth out a little area near where we
were sitting and the teacher would wander round among
the children correcting our letters. Each cloth was called
Nscdu and when we had Nsalu one, two and three, we were
promoted to the first class, when we were allowed to use
slates. There was no free universal education at that time
and every parent had to find half a crown a year. Just before
my father died, I had been ill with influenza and so unable
to attend the opening of the school. When I did at last present
myself at school the teacher asked for my two and sixpence,
and when I told him that I had no money, he sent me back
to my mother to get the necessary half-crown. I ran sobbing
to her, but she had no money in the house and she wept
with me. Fortunately, a kind neighbour came to our aid and
9

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

lent us the money which was in due course repaid. For so
small a thing in those days could a child for ever forfeit the
privilege of his life’s education.
When I at last reached the stage when I was promoted to
the middle school to take my Standards III, IV, V and VI, it
was necessary to find school fees of thirty shillings a year.
My mother had food in the garden to feed me and managed
to scrape together enough to buy my clothes but I had to
work in every school holiday for the fees. The Mission was
kind enough to employ me at ten shillings a month digging
ditches to drain the school garden and doing other jobs
around the place. In this way, for three months of the year,
I earned my school fees and in later life, when I became a
teacher, it gave me a great sympathy for schoolboys who had
to struggle to get fees for their education. Also at this early
age I was learning the great value of self-help and as I shall
relate in another chapter it led me to form the self-help club
amongst the schoolboys at Mufulira.
At the age of nine, something happened which was to
start me off on the road of instrumental music which has
been one of the greatest joys of my life. A certain Eurafrican
man, a friend of my brother, came to visit us from Livingstonia. He brought with him an ‘autoharp’ with twentyone strings and three bars of music. He taught my brother
how to make music with it and when he left he sold it to
him. It was not long before I had persuaded my brother to
teach me how to play this instrument and it was my constant
companion during my leisure hours. We played the music
which the miners brought back from the towns; it was the
dance music of the West but we gave it our own rhythms
and of course I soon began to compose my own airs and
little songs. I can conceive of no more perfect relaxation after
io

BOYHOOD

AT

LUBWA

a hard day’s work than sitting back in the light of the stars
and the moon, playing my harp while my friends and com¬
panions danced to their hearts’ content. When I became a
teacher, I purchased a guitar.
As a boy I suffered terribly from sores on my legs and on
my head. I also had frequent attacks of malaria. I was one
of the best-known patients at the hospital where I went
twice a day for treatment. Had it not been for the kind
attention of the mission doctor, Dr Brown, and the mission¬
ary nurse, I should not be here now writing this book. It
was at the hospital that I first met a boy called Simon Kapwepwe who became my firm friend and is now with me in
U.N.I.P. as Treasurer-General. In spite of the sores on my
legs, I became passionately fond of football. Our school
Principal, the Rev. Maxwell Robertson, organized the whole
school into village teams and I, of course, played with the
Galilee team. We started very young, kicking a tennis ball
around and it was not long before we were allowed a real
football to play with.
It was as a result of one of these football matches that I
was led into my second fight. We had beaten one of the
other village teams in a football match but they would not
accept defeat and after the match was over they challenged
us to a fight. The other team was composed of much bigger
boys than any we had in Galilee and they chose the biggest
of them all, sending him out like Goliath from the Philis¬
tines to challenge one of our team. Our biggest boy was too
unwell after the game to accept the challenge; the next we
called upon could not face the ordeal and so the lot fell on
me. Apart from that early fight with the schoolmaster’s son,
I had never learnt to fight at all, but I felt I had to do my best.
It was not long before the other boy had me down on the
ii

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

ground. He came on me like a charging buffalo as I lay on
my back but I met him with a tremendous kick in the
stomach which sent him over backwards and in a moment
I was up and sitting astride him triumphantly. Unknown
to me he had a knife in his pocket which he drew out and
started slashing me all over my scalp. When the spectators
saw the blood they fled and I managed to disengage. I
worried not at all about my wounds which were only super¬
ficial but I did not know how I was going to face my mother
since my white shirt was covered in blood. I took it off and
rubbed it all over with soil till it was so dirty no bloodstains
could be seen and when my mother asked what had hap¬
pened, I am afraid I lied to her and said it had been a very
rough and dirty game. I do not think to this day that she
knows about that desperate fight I was pushed into to up¬
hold the honour of my team.

2

Schooldays at Munali

We were very fortunate in having a man of Maxwell Robert¬
son’s energy and drive as Principal of the school. Everything
he did was conducted with the maximum of efficiency.
Discipline was strict and no boy was allowed to be a slacker.
He was the founder of the Boy Scout Movement in Northern
12

SCHOOLDAYS

AT

MUNALI

Rhodesia though, in those days, we called ourselves ‘Path¬
finders’. Most of the boys in the school were in one or other
of the scout troops and Maxwell Robertson deliberately
cultivated the Scout spirit and loyalty to the troop to break
down our tribal rivalries. No aspect of our education was
neglected, mental, physical and spiritual. At that time, my
mind was set upon following in my father’s footsteps as a
minister of the church. I think my mother from a very early
age had kept this ideal steadily before me. The normal way
to the ministry was by serving the church first of all as a
teacher so, when I finished my Standard VI, almost as a
matter of course, I was accepted into the Lubwa Normal
Training Course for teachers.
For two years more I went on with my education in the
Teacher Training Course and life was very little different
from that of a schoolboy. Living in the Mission, I had started
schooling at an early age, so I was one of the youngest of the
teachers in training. I do not have any outstanding memories
of that time except that once a number of us went on strike.
The previous batch of students had completed their train¬
ing in one year while our course was due to last for two years.
For some reason we got it into our heads that we were being
unjustly treated and we went on strike in protest. I cannot
remember taking the matter very seriously, for after we had
packed our blankets and gone off home for three or four
days, we came trickling back to school and we were accepted
again as students without even being asked to apologize.
In August 1940, the first Secondary School was opened at
Munali in Lusaka and in 1941 I was chosen along with
twenty-nine other students from schools throughout the
territory to take my Form I at Munali. In all my life I had
hardly set foot out of my own Chinsali District and now I

r3

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

was being asked to make the long trek to the town. It was
my first long journey on a lorry and we came within an
ace of having a serious accident. On the second day after
leaving Lubwa the driver of the truck, who had been drink¬
ing heavily all the previous day, lost control of the lorry. The
road was narrow and fortunately we were passing right
through a place with high banks on either side where a cut¬
ting had been made through one of the great anthills which
abound in our part of the country. The lorry hit one bank,
swerved across the road against the other and came to rest
in a cloud of dust. We were all very shaken but the shock
sobered the driver and we drove on. At Mpika we found
that we had missed our connection with another lorry going
south and we had to wait four days kicking our heels with
nothing to do.
I shall never forget my arrival at Kapiri Mposhi. I was
then just seventeen years old and I had never seen a train.
I don’t know what I was expecting, but I was certainly look¬
ing forward to something wonderful when we reached the
line of rail. I had been travelling for days with no oppor¬
tunity to wash properly and I was longing for a bath. From
my earliest childhood I had been accustomed to bath every
day and to bath in privacy. Now I was shown a communal
wash-place which was indescribably filthy. I hung around
for hours trying to pluck up courage to go in and hoping
against hope that some moment would come when I could
have the place to myself. The lavatory was so disgusting, 1
could hardly bring myself to use it. It took me many days
to get over the shock of that first arrival at Kapiri and I
still shudder when I think of it.
Once at Munali, after those eight wearisome days of travel,
I found myself in a new and wonderful world. For the first
*4

SCHOOLDAYS

AT

MUNALI

time I saw a laboratory and we started to learn some real
science. To begin with I was completely puzzled by the
biology classes but soon the subject came to have a great
fascination for me. I had never been good at mathematics
but at Munali I had a good teacher and the subject soon lost
its terrors so that when we took the final examination I
came second in the class. History had always been my best
subject but for some reason I did not do well in it, perhaps
because it was all South African history that we had to study.
English literature I came to love but I came down badly in
the grammar paper at the end of my course.
We lived a full and interesting life at Munali. It was by
no means all work and study in the classroom. I immedi¬
ately found myself in the football team and we had many
exciting and some very rough matches with local teams. I
still carry on my leg a large scar where I was injured by the
boot of one of the Lusaka ‘Tigers’. Great emphasis was laid
on athletics and I ran for my house in the mile and the half
mile. In my second year, I led my house to victory in the
inter-house athletics competition although I nearly lost the
house the cup by my performance in the mile race. I led the
field in the first and second lap but I must have started out
at far too fast a pace because I was soon lagging far behind.
Even though I was last in the race, I kept doggedly on and
when I received the house trophy from the hands of Sir
John Waddington, he gave me a word of commenda¬
tion for having run the race to the end. I am glad that
my first encounter with the King’s highest representa¬
tive in my country was a happy one. Not all my encounters
with Governors have been so fortunate, as my history will
show.
There was a good deal of bullying of the younger boys by

J5

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

the elder ones and this greatly upset me. I was never bullied
myself but there were only two of us in my year who man¬
aged by fierce argument with our persecutors to avoid having
buckets of cold water thrown over us at times. In my second
year, I was captain of my house with a small room to my¬
self at the end of the dormitory. Many of the younger boys
in the first year would come and hide in my room when rag¬
ging was in progress and I did all I could to protect them and
discouraged any form of bullying in my own dormitory. I
had learnt the value of strict discipline both from my parents
and from Maxwell Robertson, and was determined to have
the same kind of discipline in the school during the week I
was duty prefect. My friends tell me that I used to march
round that week with a set and serious expression on my
face. I used to wear my hair with a parting on the right and
my forelock brushed down almost over my eyes. This hair
style coupled with my forbidding appearance when on duty
earned me the name of ‘Hitler’. However, I found it paid
off well as the boys soon discovered that during my week
on duty there were no detentions to be worked off on a
Saturday. I also became quite popular with the masters who
rarely found themselves called upon to punish anyone during
my duty period.
The master who had the greatest influence upon me
during my Munali days was Daniel Sonquishe. He was from
South Africa and had taken a degree at Fort Hare. On a
Saturday morning, all the boys were detailed off for special
duties in keeping the whole place clean and some of us would
go to help the masters in their homes. Daniel Sonquishe was
a bachelor and I would frequently go to sweep his house
on a Saturday morning. When I had finished work he would
ask me to sit down and would talk to me about his life in
16

SCHOOLDAYS

AT

MUNALI

South Africa. For the first time I understood the meaning of
the word apartheid. I heard innumerable stories of the in¬
dignities which my fellow Africans suffered at the hands of
white men in the Union. Sometimes Sonquishe would say
to me: ‘Kenneth, it is almost too late for us to do anything
about it in South Africa; we’ve lost our chance, but here it
is not too late. Young men like yourself must make sure that
what happened to us in the South will never happen up
here. It is up to you now.’ We all had a very great respect
for Sonquishe. We knew that he was supporting a crippled
father and that from his meagre salary of ^13 a month he
would regularly send home £10.
Perhaps the thing that brought us closest together was our
common interest in the guitar. He and I formed a dancing
troupe and at the end of my second year, in the school holi¬
days we set off for a concert tour of the Copperbelt. We
performed in most of the Copperbelt towns to good
audiences, but the tour was not the financial success we had
hoped for, as someone stole the greater part of our takings.
I myself was in some difficulty because on the way to the
Copperbelt I had lost my wallet in which was my govern¬
ment travel warrant to take me back to my home. When I
got to Broken Hill, I went to see the head clerk at the Boma
who was a friend of mine and asked him to come with me
to see the District Commissioner to explain my predicament
and ask for a new warrant. When I got into the office I said
‘Good morning’. The District Commissioner turned to the
head clerk and said ‘tell this man in Bemba to say “Good
morning, fir”.’ Throughout that interview, the D.C. insisted
on his head clerk interpreting everything he said into Bemba
while I spoke in English. After spending all my school days
trying to become proficient in English and having studied
17

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

English literature, this D.C. wanted to push me back where
he thought I ought to be - ‘just an ordinary native’.
At Munali, we had a very active debating society which I
joined. We were not of course allowed to debate any political
subjects and I do not recollect much of what went on during
our debates, though one incident stands out clearly in my
mind. I had been asked to propose the motion ‘That rats are
found only in dirty houses’. I did my best with a subject
which I did not really agree with; then just as I was sitting
down at the end of my speech a big rat ran across the room
and everyone started laughing and jeering. Needless to say
when the motion was put to the vote my seconder was the
only one to support me.

3
Schoolmaster

I passed my Form II examination and was one of the eight
boys chosen to go on to Form III and IV, but teachers were
so urgently required back at Lubwa that the missionaries
called me home and I found myself appointed as boarding
master of the Lubwa school for boys. Although I was glad to
go back to my old home, it was a very difficult task I had
been asked to undertake, for all the other teachers on the
staff were very much senior to me, even though I had higher
18

SCHOOLMASTER

educational qualifications. Though I had completed two
years in the Teacher Training course and done some practice
teaching under supervision, I had never had any great
responsibilities.
I think I was regarded as a strict disciplinarian, though at
the same time becoming very popular with the boys because
of my keen interest in football and my guitar playing. At that
time, I took a very great interest in clothes. I had my suits
and even my shorts specially styled by the tailor at Chinsali
and the schoolboys began to copy the style in their own
dress.
At Chinsali, the Government Boma five miles from
Lubwa, the Chinsali African Welfare Association had been
founded. Most of the members were Boma clerks and local
teachers. I became a member. We discussed all matters
relating to the welfare of Africans in the area. If we had any
complaints to make we sent resolutions either to the D.C.
or to the missionaries. My own interest was mainly on the
social side of our activities. We organized dances and foot¬
ball matches. For many years I kept the minutes of those
meetings, but long ago they were eaten by white ants and
my only recollection of our business was an issue concerning
the provision of boots for the district messengers. I cannot
remember why we felt so strongly about this matter but we
made regular complaints to the D.C. on the subject over a
period of years and received no satisfaction.
Welfare Societies appear as a very early feature of African
urban society. Professor Epstein in his book, Politics in an
Urban African Community, described them as follows:
Welfare Societies were the subject of comment at a
conference of District Commissioners held in 1936. The
19

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

D.C., Broken Hill, spoke of them as ‘a representative body
of educated native opinion’. At Broken Hill, the Welfare
Association appears to have been treated as a kind of
advisory board, and was consulted by the District Com¬
missioner before he made his recommendations about new
tax rates. When the new rate was announced, he again
invoked the assistance of the association to explain the
change to the general public. The same D.C. added that
while the association undoubtedly represented ‘the think¬
ing and politically-minded Africans’, he himself regarded
it as ‘an excellent barometer of native opinion’. Other
speakers took a less favourable view of the Welfare
Associations. One spoke of them as ‘debating societies
which give the educated native an opportunity to get up
before his fellows and air his English’. The general
opinion seemed to be that since the members of the
societies were drawn from the educated class, and were
mostly clerks and capitaos (foremen) they could not be
considered representative of the African population as a
whole. The feeling of the conference was that the associa¬
tions should be allowed to develop along the lines of
debating societies, but that they should not discuss political
matters.
As early as 1945, my old friend Lt Col Sir Stewart GoreBrowne was pointing out the value of welfare societies
which he set in contrast to the official Urban Advisory
Councils. In a memorandum to the conference of Provincial
Commissioners which met in 1945, he said that the reasons
for the superior vitality of the welfare societies lay in the
fact that when the District Commissioners nominated the
members of the Advisory Councils, they were bound to
select representatives from all the main sections in the com¬
munity, whereas the welfare societies, which generally had
20

SCHOOLMASTER

no formal constitution, merely attracted the most progressive
and energetic individuals in the local community.
This view was not generally acceptable to the conference
and the Provincial Commissioners stated that they felt that
the welfare societies consisted predominantly of the more
advanced and educated Africans, ‘who represented no one
but themselves’. This fantastic statement underlines one
aspect of our long struggle for freedom. We who believe
that we are the mouthpieces of the inarticulate masses to
express their own feelings of frustration in a society domin¬
ated by white settlers are branded as political agitators
giving way to personal ambition and lusting for power. As
late as 2 March i960, Mr John Roberts, the leader of the
United Federal Party in the Northern Rhodesia Legislative
Council, warned the public against ‘power hungry politi¬
cians’. He was of course referring to myself and my col¬
leagues in U.N.I.P.
I spent four years as a teacher at Lubwa, busy not only
in school and with the Chinsali Welfare Association work
but with my pack of ‘trekkers’. We could not call them
‘cubs’ because that was the name reserved for European
packs. Happily now the African ‘Pathfinders’ and ‘trekkers’
are now united with Europeans in the Boy Scout Associa¬
tion.
Unknown to me at this time, my mother was giving long
and anxious thought to the problem of finding a wife for
me. Over at Mpika on the Great North Road there lived
the Banda family, who had been friends of my parents for
many many years. Mr Banda was a well-known business
man with a store near the Mpika Boma and he had a
daughter who, unlike most girls at that time, had remained
in school up to Standard IV. She was a hardworking girl
21

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

who earned a little pocket money by working as a ‘nurse
girl’ for the D.C.’s wife during the hours when she was
not in school. She was one of only two girls in the top class
of her school and held her own with the boys. In 1944, she
went to the famous girls’ boarding school at Mbereshi to
do her two years’ training as a teacher. There she received
her early training in cookery, dressmaking and other
domestic science subjects.
With unerring judgment, my mother selected her from
amongst all the other girls in the area as my future wife and
the marriage arrangements were concluded between the
parents. In June 1946 I was travelling to Mufulira for a
Scout Training Camp under the leadership of the Rev. F. J.
Bedford (now a secretary of the British and Foreign Bible
Society in London) and passing through Mpika, my cousin
arranged for me to meet Betty Banda. I had no doubt when
I first saw her that my mother had made a wise choice and
I have never had reason since. Betty has borne me six strong
sons and at last a baby daughter, Musata, the joy of our
hearts who, if she is not asleep, can hear the tapping of my
typewriter as I write this book. It was many years before
my wife became reconciled to my wandering life as a politi¬
cian. I think she still wishes I was a respectable schoolmaster.
Betty has been kept busy bringing up the family and I have
not often been at home to help her. Once during the Con¬
gress days in Lusaka, she joined the ‘Women’s Brigade’ and
took part with hundreds of other women in a demonstra¬
tion outside the D.C.’s office. The police dispersed the crowd
with tear-gas. On that occasion, Titus Mukupo (now of the
African Mail) who was watching the demonstration was
arrested and jailed for eighteen months though he had noth¬
ing to do with organizing the procession.
22

MY

WANDERING

DAYS

Although I did my job as a teacher at Lubwa under John
Nelson with efficiency and I think some enjoyment, I was
restless. My brother was in the army, and on two separate
occasions I applied to become a teacher in the Army Educa¬
tion Corps. The first time my mother dissuaded me, and
the second time the missionaries persuaded me that my duty
lay at home. Looking back on this period of my life, I ask
myself why I was not content to remain a teacher. I had a
good position and I was happily married. Although the
salary was not majestic, I could get most of my food from the
garden and most of my money went on clothes. I think on
reflection that I was reacting against being tied to my
mother’s apron strings for so long and weary of the authority
of the Mission. All my life I had done what others had
planned for me and I wanted to break away and be on my
own for once. I started to look around for other teaching
jobs.

4
My Wandering Days

There were three of us, teachers at Lubwa, who were great
friends; Simon Kapwepwe, from the days we had sat on
the veranda of the Lubwa hospital waiting for our sores
to be dressed, and John Sokoni. Simon and John had

23

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

accepted a teaching post at a high school in Tanganyika.
When they arrived there they were given a glowing account
of their prospects and Simon wired me to come up and join
them. I immediately caught the lorry to Mbeya but when
I arrived I was greeted by two very disappointed friends.
Their conditions of service had come through from Dar-esSalaam and their hopes were dashed. We all three decided
to go back home. On our journey through Tanganyika we
saw a wonderful plantation of gum trees which had been
planted only six years before and were already producing
gum poles which were being sold at a good profit. The
plantation was run by an African and his European friend.
I well remember the three of us sitting on a hillside above
Mbeya looking out over the lovely hills and discussing our
future. We said that if gum trees could be grown in Tangan¬
yika, they could also be grown in Northern Rhodesia. Had
we not seen the great plantation at Shiwa? We realized that
we could not start farming without capital so we determined
to go to the towns to look for work that would enable us to
amass enough capital to start farming. I still remembered
that there were opportunities in the army for qualified
teachers so Simon and I decided to go to Lusaka to apply.
After some delay we were accepted and started work, but
after only one day of service we were given half a crown and
told to leave the work. I have never discovered what hap¬
pened but I think news must have reached the army that we
were ‘undesirable’ characters.
I had already applied for a teaching post in Southern
Rhodesia so I travelled on to the south. It was a Salvation
Army school near Salisbury. Unfortunately, my departure
from Northern Rhodesia was delayed and I arrived late at
the school to find that the post had been taken by another
24

1

With Frank Chitambala
my private secretary
until i g6 x

B ;i

f

i

With Sir Stewart Gore-Browne and Mr M. M. Temple

Addressing U.N.I.P. at Mulunguishi, July 1961

Seated, l. to r., Solomon Kalulu, Sikota Wina, Mainza Chona, self, Lewis
Changufu and Nalumino Mundia

MY

WANDERING

DAYS

teacher. However, the head of the Mission said that there
was a vacancy at another school some 85 miles from Salis¬
bury at the Bindura Mine. I had little alternative but to
accept this appointment, so I duly boarded the bus and set
off. I well remember my thoughts on that painful journey.
I had been travelling for five days with never an oppor¬
tunity to take a bath; I was tired and dirty and in a strange
country without friends. All my thoughts were of home and
the parable of the Prodigal Son was never far from my mind.
As we neared our destination, the bus drew up at the
side of the road and looking out of the window I saw an
old woman filling a calabash from the muddy trickle of
rainwater in the gutter by the roadside. I asked my com¬
panion what this woman could possibly be doing, for it
was the rainy season and she could hardly have wanted to
water her garden nor could she be carrying water to make
bricks. My companion showed no surprise at what seemed
to me such extraordinary behaviour and said that there was
little water in this part of the country and that the woman
would have to walk miles to the nearest river. She was
drawing water, he said, for ordinary domestic purposes.
I must have presented a strange sight to the eyes of the
headmaster of that school when I stood on the doorstep of
his house. I had a bulky rucksack on my back, a large box
of books, a suitcase of clothes, a bundle of blankets on my
head and my guitar over my shoulder. My hair was full of
dust and my clothes were dirty and crumpled. The first
thing I did was to ask where I could wash. I was told that
the river was three miles away but that there was a place
down the road where water could be obtained. I set off and
after some time I passed a filthy pond where cattle up to
their knees in mud were drinking. I went on, keeping my

25

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

eyes open for the place where I could wash, feeling more
tired, more hungry, more dirty with every step. After what
must have been a mile and a half walk, I asked some people
passing by where was the place to wash. They directed me
back to the cattle pond. I had no alternative but to walk
back along the road and do the best I could to cleanse myself
in that wretched place. When I finally got back to the
school, I was given a meal that was so badly prepared that
I could hardly choke it down. That night, I determined to
get back home as quickly as possible but in the morning I
realized that I had no money left. There was nothing for it
but to sell something. I thought of my precious guitar but
its music was my only comfort in those days and I could
not be parted from it. I had bought a second-hand jacket
from Mokambo on the Congo border for thirty shillings,
which I managed to sell for fifty, and a sweater my mother
had given me I sold for seven and six, though it was worth
a great deal more.
I got back on the bus to Salisbury. The ticket clerk there
would not sell me a ticket until I had produced a ‘pass’. It
was the first time in my life that I had been asked to produce
a pass and, of course, I had none. Who could have issued
me with one? I knew all about Southern Rhodesia’s reputa¬
tion for harsh pass laws and I had visions of being arrested
on the spot. Frantically I put my hand into my breast pocket
to find my Northern Rhodesia identity certificate which I
must have known had no validity in Southern Rhodesia but
which at least showed my name. By a stroke of luck, my
Church Removal certificate from Lubwa lay alongside my
identity certificate in my wallet. I pulled it out and before
I had time to make any explanations the ticket clerk took
this official-looking document for some kind of pass and
26

My mother, self and
wife, with our only
daughter

With my sons Tilyenji,
Masuzgo, Kaweche and
Wezi

My present house in Chilenje - Hut No. 394 from which Zambia African
Congress was launched

Government House. Lusaka

— *&#*+****? I#.

t

MY

WANDERING

DAYS

gave me my ticket without asking any questions. After buy¬
ing my ticket, I counted my small change and found I had
exactly three and sixpence left for food. I bought a loaf of
brown bread and a bottle of Mazoe Orange Crush. Know¬
ing that I had a four-day journey before me, I took out my
knife and carefully divided the bread into four equal
pieces.
At Bulawayo I saw my first fight between a European
and an African. The African was a cripple, lame in both legs
and the European was punching him in the face. Although
the African was a lame man he had powerful shoulders and
powerful arms. Suddenly turning on his assailant, he
grabbed him by the wrists and began to shake him as a dog
will shake a rat. I was afraid that something terrible would
happen, so I rushed to where I had previously seen a police¬
man, but he had gone and when I came back the fight was
over. Some bystanders had parted the two men. This was
the first and only time I have ever seen a real fight, with
the exception of the cowboy fights I have sometimes seen
on the cinema screen.
When I boarded the train again at Bulawayo, I found
myself sitting with a family travelling up to Kitwe on the
Copperbelt. We chatted together and when I pulled out my
bottle of Mazoe, I offered them all a drink. We became
quite friendly and they must have noticed that all day I
ate nothing but my small ration of brown bread. That even¬
ing they offered to share their meal with me and I accepted
their generous hospitality, but all next day I avoided them,
being embarrassed that they should expect to have to offer
me food again. What a relief it was to cross the Zambezi
once more and arrive back in my own country. There I
met some of my former pupils from Lubwa who took me
B

27

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

off the train and gave me a bath and food. The Prodigal
had returned home again.
Still looking for capital for a farm, I went to the Copperbelt. When my friend John Sokoni had left us after the
Tanganyika trip, he had gone to work in a shop at Kitwe.
I thought I would look him up and see what luck he had
found as a shop assistant. I met him on the pavement out¬
side the shop. He was coming out with a long face. He had
just been given twenty-six shillings for a month’s work.
Although I did not realize it at the time, I now nearly
fell into the hands of the World Federation of Trade Unions.
There was a certain European, leader of the European trade
union on the mines who, much against the wishes of his
white brothers, was advocating that Africans should be
brought into the (European) Mine Workers’ Union. He had
just come from an overseas conference of trade unionists
where he had been offered a sum of money to help him
organize the bringing of Africans into his union. I applied
for a job as an organizing secretary of this African branch
of his union but, for a reason I did not know at the time,
the scheme was dropped.
It was only after reading Professor Epstein’s writings
which give an account of the formation of the African Mine
Workers’ Union that I learnt the story behind this episode.
This is worth relating for it illustrates our African suspicion
of any overtures made to us by white settlers:
The possibility of a strong and independent trade union
movement among the African mine workers was viewed
by the European miners as at once representing a serious
threat to their own position. The President of the (Euro¬
pean) Mine Workers’ Union, who some time previously
had said of the formation of African trade unions that one
28

MY

WANDERING

DAYS

could not stop a mass movement, began to make overtures
to the Africans, whom he addressed at a number of meet¬
ings. He sought to persuade them to drop the idea of
forming a separate union and instead to enter the existing
Mine Workers’ Union. He argued that the African union
would be weak and ineffective since, being sponsored by
Government, the Africans would not be accorded the
right to strike. He pointed out further that such a move
would strengthen the position of the mining companies
by causing a division in the ranks of labour. However,
these advances were rejected by the African leaders. Why
was it, they asked, that no such proposal had been made
in all the years that had passed since the (European) Mine
Workers’ Union came into existence, until the Africans
appeared to be about to have their own union? The
African leaders claimed too that if, raw and completely
inexperienced in trade union affairs, they went in with
the European miners, all executive control and power to
conduct negotiations would be vested in the whites. The
Africans asked how, if they were not to have responsibility
in running their own trade union, they would be given
the opportunity of showing that they were capable of
shouldering responsibility in the wider political sphere.
This was how I narrowly escaped being a trade unionist.
I now realized that having been trained as a teacher, my
best chance of earning capital was in teaching work. I applied
for a teaching post on the Copperbelt. While I was waiting
to hear whether my application had been approved, I got a
job as a Welfare Assistant at the Nchanga Mine. My salary
was £/\ per month and I was terribly bored. All I seemed to
be asked to do was to hang around the Welfare Centre and
open up the library. Nearly all the books in the library I had
read when I was at school, and my boss was a man for whom
29

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

I had no respect. It came as a relief when I was accepted for
teaching again. By this time, Betty and my firstborn child had
joined me and we went together to Mufulira. I was appointed
as boarding master of the school under the management of
the Rev. Fergus McPherson and my wife taught in the
primary school. We determined to work together to improve
our standard of living and in order to increase our combined
income (I was earning £5 13s. 6d. per month and my wife
£3 3s. 6d. per month), we decided to buy second-hand clothes
from Mokambo, just over the Congo border, and send them
up to my home to be sold at a small profit. People were per¬
mitted by law to cross into the Congo to buy second-hand
American clothes, but each person was only allowed to bring
back one jacket and one dress or shirt. At the end of the
month when I had received my salary, I would organize a
group of schoolboys and on a Saturday afternoon we would
cross the border at Mokambo and come back wearing the
strangest assortment of clothes.
Many of the boarders at the school had difficulty in find¬
ing their school fees, so I organized them into a self-help
club. They bought seeds and made gardens near the school
to grow vegetables. These I bought for the school instead
of going to the market. In this way, a number of boys earned
their school fees. Some of the older boys wanted to join the
local branch of Congress, of which I was Vice-Secretary,
and in order to raise their subscriptions, they agreed to bring
along each a penny per week which I collected. I took great
delight at Mufulira in training the church choir, and it
became quite well known.
I was chosen by the other teachers to represent them on
the Urban Advisory Council. I served on this Council for a
long time but the meetings were very dull. Its members were

3°

COLOUR

BAR

nominated by the D.C. after consulting with the various
groups represented in the Council. In 1949, I was elected
to go to the Provincial Council and only narrowly missed
being chosen by that body to represent them on the African
Representative Council for the whole territory.

5

Colour Bar

In Mufulira, for the first time, I found myself suffering the
indignities of the colour bar. Africans were not permitted
to enter the European shops by the front door. If they wanted
anything, they had to go to a hole in the wall at the side of
the shop to ask for it. I determined to expose this system
for what it was, an insult to my race and my people. I told
some of the boys in the school that I intended to challenge
the colour bar and I chose a certain chemist’s shop in town
which was notorious for its treatment of Africans. As well
as medicines, this shop sold toys and books. While my boys
waited outside on the pavement, I went inside and asked
politely for a book. I remember it was Arthur Mee’s Tal\s
to Boys. My friend John Sokoni had once rescued a tattered
copy from a miner who was using its pages to roll his cigar¬
ettes and it is a book that has had a profound influence on
my life.
31

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

The girl behind the counter had probably never been
addressed before by an African in her own language. She
motioned me over to the chemist who stood behind the
counter. I repeated my question. Pointing to the door, he
said viciously, ‘Get out of here.’ I said again, ‘I am only
asking for a book and I can get it nowhere else in town.’
He said, ‘You can stand there till Christmas and you’ll never
get a book from me.’ I was just thinking that as it was the
month of August I would have to wait rather a long time,
when two white miners in their overalls walked into the
shop. Hearing the proprietor say again, ‘Get out,’ they took
me by the arms and frog-marched me to the door. There
they were met by seventeen angry schoolboys who objected
strongly to their schoolmaster being treated in this manner
and they said so in no uncertain terms. A vigorous slanging
match followed in which we were called ‘black-skinned
niggers’ and we replied by asking what was so wonderful
about a white skin anyway. Being so heavily outnumbered,
the two Europeans made for their car and made a quick
getaway.
I immediately went round to the Boma to make a com¬
plaint about the way I had been treated. There was a young
District Officer there whom I knew well. He took me into
his office. He listened with sympathy to my story and began
thumping the table in his indignation. He said, ‘Look here,
Kenneth, if ever you want anything just come along to me
and f will give you a note.’ ‘But,’ f said, ‘that is not the
point, what about all the thousands of others who want to
be treated like reasonable human beings in the shops? Have
they got to come to you every time for a note?’ He promised
to write a letter to the chemist and t let the matter drop. A
few days later, 1 decided to go into the shop again to see
32

COLOUR

BAR

whether the District Officer’s words had made any differ¬
ence. Again I made a simple request but it was a different
man behind the counter and he ordered me out of the shop.
I said that I would see to it that something would be done.
He just laughed scornfully and said, ‘You try.’ I again went
round to the Boma and this time the District Officer accom¬
panied me back to the shop. I distinctly remember him say¬
ing to the chemist, ‘Do you realize that you have been
behaving like this to a man who may before long be sitting
in the Legislative Council?’ (It was just at the time when I
had been elected to the Provincial Council.) The proprietor
was a little taken aback and asked me into his dispensary
to apologize. He said, ‘Mr Kaunda, if only you had told
me who you were, I am sure I would not have ordered you
out of my shop.’ Once again I had to explain that I was not
asking for any special consideration for myself, I was simply
asking that my people should be treated with reasonable
courtesy in their own country. I left Mufulira soon after this
incident. No one else followed up my protest and things
reverted to normal in the shops.
I never challenged this issue again until 1957 when I was
visiting Kitwe with Harry Nkumbula, President of the
African National Congress. This being the white area of
Kitwe there were no African eating houses near by. We
drove to a cafe, having been told by our driver that this
cafe would sell us what we wanted, provided we did not
demand to take our meal there; but he did not tell us that
even to do that we had to stand by the door where an African
servant could come and ask us what we wanted and could
then go in to get us whatever we wanted. We went into
the cafe to the counter and I asked for some sandwiches.
In reply a young girl of about seventeen told me that ‘boys’
33

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

were not served at the counter. When I told her that I was
not a ‘boy’ and all I wanted was a dozen sandwiches, she
spoke to an elderly white woman who was apparendy in
charge. On asking me what I wanted, she repeated that
‘boys’ were not served at that counter. I repeated in my turn
that I was not a ‘boy’. At this point I was dragged out of the
cafe by my clothes by a European man who had already
dragged Harry Nkumbula outside the cafe. This white man
hit Harry and called him a cheap, spoiled nigger. Five other
white men joined him in attacking us and we defended our¬
selves. White men and black men passing joined in the fight,
and an apartheid type of brawl took place. This was my third
and last fight.
We were ordered to leave the premises but we refused on
the grounds that the white men who had started the fight
could get away if we did so. In the end we were given an
escort of an African policeman despite the fact that we were
the complainants. The white men went to the Charge Office
unescorted.
At the Charge Office we were asked to make a statement.
Harry Nkumbula began by saying that the girl at the
counter refused to serve us. Before he could end his sentence,
the white superintendent of police who had come to stop the
fight said, ‘You cannot call a white lady a “girl” or a
“woman”.’ Harry ignored this and went on to say that
‘after that an elderly woman came . . .’ but again, before he
could finish his sentence, the superintendent said, ‘I say, you
cheeky nigger, you cannot call a European lady a woman.’
Then this police officer called Harry to a room and closed
the door and beat him up. Harry told this officer that he
was lucky he was wearing Her Majesty the Queen’s uniform,
or one or other of them would have been killed.
34

COLOUR

BAR

When the case came to court, our demand that we should
be medically examined by a doctor chosen by us was refused
and we therefore chose not to continue with the case.
The following morning after the incident a group of mineworkers went to the cafe and said to the proprietor, ‘We have
heard that our leaders were beaten up here. We have come
to have our revenge.’ There was a police guard on the cafe
and the leader of the group of men was arrested and fined.
This was the type of incident that was taking place con¬
tinually in the Federation which, according to spokesmen
like Sir Roy Welensky, was achieving racial partnership and
good feeling.
Even as I write, in spite of the passing of anti-colour bar
legislation by the Northern Rhodesia government, unfor¬
tunate incidents can take place. This very month (March
1962) the Vice-President of the Christian Council of
Northern Rhodesia, the Rev. M. S. Lucheya, entered a cafe
with his European colleague, the President of the Council,
and was refused a cup of tea. Can anyone wonder that we
sometimes feel bitter about the European settler who treats
us like some kind of subhuman species in the land of our
birth ?
Of course one could fill all the pages of this book with
stories of this kind. Amongst ourselves, we spend hours
laughing about these things because they often make the
Europeans look very silly. In our U.N.I.P. headquarters, we
have an office orderly who is a faithful servant of the
nationalist movement. He is a small man who has never had
the advantage of a good education so does not speak very
fluent English. One day some years ago he went to the old
Lusaka post office which, at that time, was segregated. Un¬
wittingly he found himself in the European side and as there

35

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

were not many people about he went up to the counter and,
pushing a shilling under the grill, he said, ‘Please penny
stamps madam’. She did not take any notice so, trying again,
he said, ‘Please penny stamps girl.’ At this the assistant called
a policeman and our orderly was asked to explain his be¬
haviour. In his own forceful way he said to the policeman,
‘Me say stamps madam. She nothing. Me say stamps girl.
She nothing. Me say this thing stupid.’ Fortunately the
policeman had sufficient sense of humour to laugh it off.

6
I Decide to go Home

The decision to go back home was reached by the three of us,
Simon Kapwepwe, John Sokoni and myself, late in 1948.
We saved up to secure bicycles to enable us to move about
and attend meetings freely. We decided to purchase watches
in order to be on time for such meetings. My wife and I
decided we should also get a sewing machine to help us to re¬
pair whatever second-hand goods I could bring back from
Katabulwe that needed to be mended before selling. I have
already mentioned my week-end trips to Mokambo. The
small savings from our meagre monthly pay packets, plus
what we managed to raise from the sale of these second-hand
goods helped us to purchase our three main requirements.

36

I

DECIDE

TO

GO

HOME

I remember how we were thinking of what we were going
to do for a container for our belongings when the biblical
teaching of Jesus Christ came out strikingly, ‘Therefore take
no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall
we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? ... for
your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things.’ One morning Mr Nkaka, who was a good friend
of our family, came in to see us. He told us he and our
senior boys were in the process of making us a wooden trunk
for our clothes. It was quite a relief for us and we made our
sincere thanks known to our friend. Mr Nkaka was head
instructor at our school and he and Mrs Nkaka were also
members of our church choir. This kind of incident, of
which there have been many in my life, have helped me
immensely and given me encouragement.
A good number of our friends came to the Mufulira rail¬
way station to give us a send-off. In spite of the fact that our
school boys and girls were on holiday, there was quite a
crowd to see us off. At Kapiri Mposhi we looked in vain for
the Kapwepwe family, who were to join us there, so we left
without our friends. We did not have sufficient money to
enable us to pay our personal fares as well as transport for
our few belongings, so we paid for my wife as far as Mpika
Boma, where my parents-in-law were then living, and paid
for Sokoni and myself and our bicycles up to Lukulu, some
ninety miles south of Mpika Boma. We got to Mpika safely
the following evening after a restful night at Lukulu. We
were wondering how we would cycle through the lioninfested areas between Mpika and Chinsali, some one hun¬
dred and twenty miles, when our faithless hearts were once
more reminded of how providential the Creator is. On that
day, one of our friends who was driving a lorry offered us
37

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

a lift to Chinsali. We got back home to a big welcome.
Sokoni went home to his parents and I remained to plan
what I would do next.
Many old friends came to welcome us home and among
them one of my very early friends who had disappeared for
a long time from our district and who had come back during
my own absence. He was Robert S. Makasa who was still
teaching at Lubwa. For the first time in my life I was sitting
down to plan my life my own way.
I was caught up immediately by three things. There was
the farming instinct, the trading in second-hand goods
instinct, and the political one. As a firm believer in the co¬
operative movement where people are poor, I got some few
friends together to open up a co-operative farm at my own
mother’s place. We called it the Chinsali Youngmen’s
Farming Association. Sokoni started a similar one for the
area south of us. We were both made managers of our re¬
spective places. I must say we did very well in view of our
having no prior experience. We read extensively anything we
could lay our hands on about agricultural science. These
were very happy days for me. I had the satisfaction of plan¬
ning something and realizing it on my own. We then had
only one child, Panji Tushuke. This is the boy who, on
his first birthday, in my presence and that of a good number
of my pupils, got up and ran to the wall and never went
back to crawling again. That is how he began to walk. He
did not want to miss me and I always had to sneak off when
going away, for he would always follow crying and calling
me back if he knew I was leaving him. All mv former school¬
boys at Mufulira remember and ask after him when I meet
them, for he was very popular with them. I built myself a
four-roomed house and a very well laid-out front garden.
38

I

DECIDE

TO

GO

HOME

My senior sister who had retired as a nurse also came to live
with us and we built a four-roomed house for her. My
brother, who was still teaching, lived in his old three-roomed
house when he came on leave, and my second sister shared
her sister’s house with her when she came back on leave.
We were a very happy family group.
I grew a good number of vegetables. My one-acre orchard
consisted of orange, lemon, guava, pawpaw and mango
trees. There were also bananas. My one big difficulty was
irrigation. One of my greatest pleasures was in rearing
chickens. My neighbour, a very hard-working farmer called
Aaron Mbalashi, reared some improved stock. He sold his
improved stock of eggs at fourpence each and in this way he
helped us all to improve our poultry. Then there were our
maize, cassava, bean, corn and other fields. The most enjoy¬
able period was when seeds were germinating. All this meant
real hard work but it was all my own and I simply loved it.
There were the second-hand goods which had earned
themselves the name of Mokambo. I suppose this was due to
the fact that most of the first popular second-hand goods
were found on the Copperbelt and were bought from
Mokambo. I would cycle for over three hundred miles up to
Katabulwe across the Luapula River in the then Belgian
Congo with some of our neighbours and we would cross the
Luapula back to Northern Rhodesia and then would come
the scramble to load them on the Thatcher and Hobson
goods’ lorries. All this was terribly strenuous. And then
came the long race cycling home to try and arrive back be¬
fore our goods. During my absence from the farm, my sister
took charge of the farm labour and my wife dealt with the
second-hand clothes shop.
My political activities did not end with my leaving the
39

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Copperbelt. Late in 1949, I contacted the General Secretary
of the Northern Rhodesia African Congress, who then was
Mr Robinson Nabulyato, for permission to open up a branch
of Congress in Chinsali. I got the authority to go ahead and
then discussed this with Makasa and Sokoni. We agreed that
the best way of going about it would be to introduce this
to the Chinsali African Welfare Association. We did so and
Congress was given a cautious welcome in Chinsali. Early in
March, Makasa was elected Chairman, I was elected Secre¬
tary and a friend of ours, Mr Simon Sula, was elected
Treasurer. We learnt later that news had gone round that
taking office in Congress meant going to prison. This
rumour was so strong that the nominations were in actual
fact arranged to use us as guinea pigs since we had our¬
selves introduced Congress. Mr Sula was head accountant at
the training school while Makasa was headmaster of Nkula
Lower Middle School.
The period that followed was one of the most amazing in
my life. During the week, I would be working at my farm
while Makasa would be teaching. On Fridays, I would cycle
to his school and then after work we would cycle for dis¬
tances of from forty to sixty miles. We would be singing
hymns which the Rev. R. D. McMinn and Rev. P. B.
Mushindo translated into Bemba from the Church of Scot¬
land hymn books. We placed ourselves, more than ever be¬
fore, entirely in the hands of our Creator. Chinsali District
has always had plenty of man-eating lions, but whether such
man-eating lions were at large or not was immaterial. We
went on and organized our people. When Makasa was too
busy to go, Sokoni was usually there, and when neither of
them was available, which was rare, I went alone. What was
the message that the Chinsali people were receiving at this
40

I

DECIDE

TO

GO

HOME

time? We had to make our people conscious that they were
human beings just as good or as bad as any other. Even twelve
years ago this message was not difficult to put across to our
people. I was aware that most of our people who had gone to
fight in defence of the British Empire had suffered for noth¬
ing; we were only employed as hewers of wood and drawers
of water, and we could not eat from the same tables nor
share the same beds in hotels. I would ask which was more
important: to prepare someone else’s meals and beds or to
share them? Was it not common sense that a person who
prepared your meals and made your bed and looked after
you was controlling your life? How stupid it was for any¬
one to say you may control my life but I will not sit at the
same table with you because you are stinking or because
you are black. Then there was my most popular story.
This was the story of an African soldier who was not even
called a soldier, but an as\ari, and yet sent to fight against
Hider, who was a horrible racialist. In fact, we went to
defend the so-called Western or Christian values. I would
point out the differences that existed in pay, uniform, food
and in all other conditions of service. I would then portray
this as\ari demobilized with none of the promises made to
him fulfilled. This as\ari would suffer so much, he would
end up a road labourer. Then he would ask for a lift from
his road foreman who would put him at the back of a
Government van while his dog shared the front seat with
him. At an hotel, the Big Bwana would leave him to look
after his luggage while he himself went in to take a meal.
The dog would be given some food while this cx-as\ari
would have nothing. Then they would arrive in town and
this man, who risked his life just like his English counter¬
part, would go to a shop to see inscribed above the door, no
41

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

To his surprise when window-shop¬
ping he would see an actual dog right inside through the
window. On his attempting to get inside he would be met at
the door with a big, ‘Get out of here, you nigger, bobojana'
(meaning monkey). ‘No Kaffirs allowed in here.’ Then
would his own fellow black man come to order him out. ‘Tata

dogs allowed inside.

\abiyeni ffiinse u\o l{u ntolo\oso e\ushitila abafita muno
mwa ba bwana epela.’ This means, ‘Go out to the pigeon¬

hole. Only white men may come in here.’ Then this tx-as\ari
would look back to the days before the Second World War.
He would remember how campaigns were conducted to re¬
cruit him, and others like him, the differences between a
black and white serviceman, the promises he had been given
of what could be done for him on being demobilized. Then
he would come nearer to where he was: how his road foreman
exposed him to the heat, the cold or the rain, while he shared
the warmth and all with his dog. He would end up asking,
‘Where is the partnership in this country that Welensky
talks about?’ From there on he would decide to join the
Northern Rhodesia African Congress. This is how almost all
my meetings were addressed. I would end up by asking
whether what I was saying was true or not true. Someone
courageous enough would stand up in support. A good
number of ex-servicemen found themselves weeping with
the speaker, so did many members of the audience, both
men and women. What I said could not fail to be effective
because it was what the African experienced and, to a very
large extent, still experiences today. The difference is that
while in 1950 fewer people realized what was happening was
wrong, more do so today. Now people realize, by the thou¬
sand, not only that what has been happening is wrong but
also that, if they come together, they can remedy the wrong.
42

I

DECIDE

TO

GO

HOME

In this way I warmed up Chinsali to a comparatively high
level of political consciousness.
Mr R. R. Stokes, who was so impressed with our efforts to
organize ourselves as farmers that he helped to develop our
area by opening a new road from the Boma to the Lubu
plains, was one day tackled very seriously about his sym¬
pathies with us. It was the first time there had been such a
direct conflict between a representative of the Crown and
the common man. This took place at Senior Chief Nkula’s
village. I don’t remember what the trouble was exactly but
this man found courage to speak and he spoke. I can well
remember the expression of utter disgust on the Government
officials’ faces.
In 1951, something happened that helped to hasten the
pace of African nationalism in this country. Mr Harry
Nkumbula, who was on one of his trips to the Indian Ocean
islands to collect sea shells for sale in Bwila, was invited by
our then General Secretary, Mr Nabulyato, to attend our
conference in Lusaka. Mr Mbikusita was then our President.
I remember that among the things he said was:
I believe that the future of the African people of
Northern Rhodesia is safer in the hands of the Colonial
Office than it would be under any form of responsible
Government or Federal rule. I do not believe that the
Colonial Office would exert such a strong influence if
Northern Rhodesia was amalgamated to Southern
Rhodesia, which has almost full responsible government.
Speaking of representations made to the Secretary of State,
he went on:
It is not only on the fair-mindedness of the individual
43

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Minister holding that office that the Africans rely. The
Minister is answerable through the House of Commons to
the people of Britain and the majority of these people the voters of Britain - are working men and women who
understand the troubles and hopes of working people in
the Colonies better than the employers of those people,
even if they live in Africa. The working men and women
of England know what fair and liberal treatment has done
to improve their lives and they will not grudge to Africans
the same treatment.
Mr Mbikusita at this time was anti-Federation, as the
following quotation shows:
You will remember that two years after the Victoria
Falls Conference, I, as your President, addressing the
Kitwe African Society, put forward a suggestion that a
Federation between Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland and
Tanganyika would be more acceptable. It is unfortunate
that the terms of reference of the London Conference were
too narrow to include this suggestion. I would like, once
again, to put this idea forward and include this time that
Conference of delegates of all East and Central African
States sponsored by Government be assembled in London
to consider the need for closer association. Africans of this
country and of Nyasaland would feel less anxious in a
Federation which included the Mandated Territory of
Tanganyika, the politically progressive country of Kenya
and the African Protectorates of Uganda and Zanzibar.
The influence of Southern Rhodesia’s 134,000 Europeans
would not be felt with the same force in so great a Federa¬
tion.
He ended by praising Dr Hastings Banda and ‘all our out¬
standing individual members’.
44

HARRY

NKUMBULA

AS

LEADER

This is how the man who, in 1951, led the opposition to
federation ended his address and who in the following year
was the first African to join the party that stood for Federa¬
tion and has been in the Federal Parliament ever since. This
is the story of the man who, in 1951, proposed a PanAfricanist form of federation but the following year em¬
barked on the way that has led him to oppose everything
Pan-Africanist and to propose and fight for the secession of
Barotseland from the rest of Northern Rhodesia. From here,
another man took over from him.

7
Harry Nkumbula as Leader

I first met Mr Nkumbula in 1944. We travelled on the same
lorry from Kapiri Mposhi to Shiwa Ng’andu. I had a vivid
memory of him because at Mpika Boma one of our fellowpassengers took seriously ill, but the driver did not seem to
care and, in fact, was preparing to leave the poor passenger
behind when Mr Nkumbula surprised us by speaking very
strongly to the driver, pointing out that it was his responsi¬
bility to see that the passenger was cared for. Drivers in those
days, especially those who drove passenger lorries, were
virtually kings unto their own. So for anyone to dare to chal¬
lenge the king in his own domain needed great courage.
45

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Seven years afterwards, I recognized Mr Nkumbula and
reminded him of this performance and I remember Mr
Nabulyato remarking that some people have good mem¬
ories.
There were twenty-seven of us at this conference. Makasa
and I came from Chinsali. Mr Nkumbula spoke against
Federation for over an hour and he won our sympathies
immediately. Meanwhile, some serious canvassing was
going on. Mr Gordon Chindele was going round saying that
if Mr Nkumbula was elected, he would mislead us as he was
too hot-headed and that we should elect Mr Mbikusita and
then make Mr Nkumbula an organizing secretary. I remem¬
ber how furiously we worked to counteract what we thought
was a wrong choice, even though I doubt if Mr Nkumbula
knows to this day who his secret campaign agents were. Our
efforts were rewarded when Mr Nkumbula received twentyfour votes, Mr Safeli Chileshe, who had just left govern¬
ment service as a teacher received three, and Mr Mbikusita
received one. This shows that even Mr Chindele did not vote
for his candidate, or else the candidate forgot to vote for
himself.
In February 1952, we held a very explosive conference and
it was at this conference that I met a white Northern
Rhodesian who seriously treated Northern Rhodesia as his
own country. He was a full member of the Congress and
did not hide the fact. He spoke freely against Federation.
I remember how moved I was by the speeches which he
delivered in a very high-pitched voice. I had a feeling he was
not safe at all. His political activities included the forma¬
tion of an anti-Federation committee in Ndola. He, together
with Reuben Chitandika Kamanga, Justin Chimba and
Alick Chifunda were co-editors of a very inspiring Freedom
46

HARRY

NKUMBULA

AS

LEADER

Newsletter which led to his being watched even more. One
other thing I remember was when Mr Nkumbula who was
speaking in reply to a threat from the Attorney-General
spoke so inspiringly, I shouted, ‘Long live Harry. . . . Death
to the traitor.’
One other important thing that happened at this historic
conference of February 1952 was the formation of the
Supreme Action Council. This was a sort of War Cabinet on
the lines of Sir Winston Churchill’s. The Executive Council
was left to deal with ordinary matters but the Supreme
Action Council was to direct the fight against Federation. I
was a member of this Council and our first meeting was held
on 27 February. The Attorney-General reacted very sharply
to our plans and issued threat after threat. The result was
that the Supreme Action Council issued a public statement
which was signed by Mr George Kaluwa, the then ViceGeneral Secretary. The statement said:
After a meeting of the Supreme Action Council of the
Northern Rhodesia African Congress at Lusaka on 27
February 1952 the following statement was made by the
General President to the open Congress and Congress
endorsed it:
‘The Supreme Action Council wishes to draw the atten¬
tion of the public to a warning conveyed to the Congress by
the Attorney-General through the two African members
of the Legislative Council in the following words: 7 am
warning you that the Government will not hesitate to use
its powers to deal with disorders caused including general
stride planned by your meetings’

When the African members of Legco protested that the
forcing of Federation was the cause of the tension, the
Attorney-General said that it did not matter if the Govern47

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

ment was good or bad; it was there to govern and it would
do so.
The statement went on to say that no disorderly conduct
was intended by Congress, and that Congress’s protest action
had been forced upon Africans ‘by the refusal of the Govern¬
ment of the U.K. and of N.R. to pay any attention to the
unanimous opposition’ against Federation.
The conference came to an end but the atmosphere was
not helped by the Attorney-General’s threat. We were so
upset that almost all delegates bought red ties to signify we
were prepared to die for our country. All of us went back
to report to our branches the important resolutions passed
by the conference, one of which was to send a powerful
delegation to Britain to protest against Federation. This was
to be led by Mr Nkumbula and consisted of the Paramount
Chief Chitimukulu, Senior Chief Musokotwane, Mr Nabulyato and the late Mr L. C. Katilungu. There was great en¬
thusiasm in the whole country. Senior civil servants spoke at
fund-raising public meetings. Committees to raise these funds
were formed right through the country. The campaign went
well and our delegation left. Thousands of pounds were
raised and, looking back now, it is clear to all of us that we
did not have the machinery to make sure that all the
funds reached the Congress and so we must have lost thou¬
sands. This difficulty is one which faces many political
parties including my own and we were looking into this
seriously last year when disturbances began. We have now
secured the services of a chartered accountant to help us
devise methods of controlling the raising of funds.
Back at home, the agenda of all our public meetings now
included our fight against Federation. We were fortunate to
48

HARRY

NKUMBULA

AS

LEADER

have the document prepared by Mr Nkumbula and Dr
Hastings K. Banda when they were good friends in London.
The document was very detailed and it was a great help to
all of us who had copies and, in fact, it was reproduced at a
later stage in pamphlet form. It is reproduced in full
(pp. 166-76) to confute those who repeatedly say that we
had no adequate reasons for rejecting Federation. Most of
our grounds for rejection are still valid today.
And so the great movement rolled on. We had just re¬
ceived notification letters to attend the second session of the
Supreme Action Council when news reached us that our
white Congress member had been arrested. It was a very
depressing time for most of us. Mr Mbikusita, our former
President, gave evidence against this man, his former
member, Simon Ber Zukas. I don’t know what the charge
was but Simon Zukas was deported to Britain. I am glad he
is now happily married and settled. He is running a good
business, a firm of civil engineers, and I do hope that we will
be able, as a country, to benefit by his experience. I might
add here, as a matter of interest, that a white supporter of
ours asked me at a meeting in Luanshya what we would do
if some of our white or brown supporters or members of
U.N.I.P. were deported by the Federal Government. In
reply I said that deportation would only be temporary and
very soon we would be giving them a hero’s welcome.
Our Supreme Action Committee, which met at Broken
Hill in April 1952, was not a very happy affair at all. Some
members did not turn up. Perhaps I should mention here
that this is the time I posted our terribly angry letter to the
missionaries at Lubwa which I refer to elsewhere. At this
juncture, a friend of mine from whom I had taken over at
Lubwa Training School, and who was in charge at Kasama
49

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Upper School, suggested to some of our people who were
organizing themselves as the Kasama African Welfare
Association, which later they changed to Kasama African
Institute, that it might be a good idea if they invited me to
speak at one of their meetings on the subject of Federa¬
tion. This man is Mr Henry Chibuta, now Assistant
Manager of Schools at Mpika. However, this was not to be
for, just at the time they were trying to contact me, a con¬
ference of Chiefs and people was called in Lusaka. It was a
big affair. The London delegation reported back. It was all
a most spirited occasion. Chiefs and their people mixed
freely and stood as one in their opposition to Federation.
The Northern Rhodesia Government did not take all this
very well. The Minutes of this conference carry this record :
Chiefs’ Interview S.N.A.: The Secretary for Native

Affairs, through the District Commissioner, Lusaka, sent
two District Messengers to ask the African National Con¬
gress to allow the Chiefs to see him on 23 August 1952. The
Chiefs debated the invitation and resolved that they
accept it.
On 24 August, at 3 p.m., the Chiefs met the Secretary
for Native Affairs. A full report of what happened had
not been written but the Secretary for Native Affairs said
the following in an interview with the Chiefs:
1 You Chiefs should not surrender your Power to the
African National Congress. The Congress is aim¬
ing at taking away your chieftainships.
2 You should not subscribe money to the Congress, as
it will only buy motor-cars with it and nothing else
you will see done for you.
3 A certain Chief refused to co-operate with the
African National Congress; he is a very wise Chief
indeed.
5°

HARRY

NKUMBULA

AS

LEADER

Chiefs’ Reply to S.N.A.: Several Chiefs replied com¬
menting on the S.N.A.’s points in the following manner:
1 If Congress ever took our Chieftainships, there
could be no difference since all Congress Officials
are our own sons, and we could still have African
Chiefs. But this is not Congress’s intention.
2 We do not mind even if Congress can buy motor¬
cars with the money we subscribe, since the Govern¬
ment also buys cars with the money we pay taxes,
but we can’t worry because we have already given it
away.
3 The only Chief who is not interested in Congress’s
efforts to ward off Federation is the one whose
country is not included in the Federal Scheme and,
naturally, he has no need for worry.

From this time onward, the Northern Rhodesia Govern¬
ment took a firm stand. It did all in its power to deal very
severely with all our Chiefs who showed any signs of sup¬
porting the Nationalists. The divide and rule policy had
never been more openly displayed. From this time, the cam¬
paign of persecution and prosecution of Congress men and
women was fully launched and some terrible things were
done in the name of maintaining law and order, as I will
show later.

51

8

Organizing Secretary, Northern Province

It was after this conference that I was appointed Organizing
Secretary for the Northern Province. The Northern
Province, at that time, included today’s Luapula Province.
In other words, I was charged with the responsibility of
organizing our people from the boundary of Serenje and
Mpika Districts to the Tanganyika border in the north, and
then from the Nyasaland border to that of the then Belgian
Congo in the west. All this had to be done on a bicycle. It
was a tremendous challenge and I was quite happy to
accept. It was a wonderful training ground. Later, as
Secretary-General of the African National Congress and as
President-General of the banned Zambia African National
Congress, and now as National President of the United
National Independence Party, I am still able to draw on my
personal experiences of those days when I was a field
organizer.
In this very difficult work, I had much help from a good
many sources. There was the inspiration I got from my
early reading of Abraham Lincoln’s life; there was Arthur
Mee’s Tal\s to Boys. Thanks are due to our friend and
colleague Rambai Patel who had, at that time, got us so
much literature on the Indian struggle for independence. It
was on my very first trip that I came to he introduced to
a friend who never leaves my bookshelf and is always with
52

ORGANIZING

SECRETARY

me on any trip I undertake; that book is In Tune With the
Infinite by Ralph Waldo Trine. My family was also a great
help to me. They did not complain that I was away most
of the time. In fact, at one time I went away for three full
months and brought back a beard. I was on the move all the
time with the result that I did not write a single letter back
home. Although they did not complain, they did discuss my
movements between themselves - my mother, sister and my
wife. They wondered whether I was just trying to dodge my
farm responsibilities. This ‘conspiracy’, carefully concealed
from me for some time, is now a source of great laughter
when we remember it in our family.
To put down my experiences in the twelve months I
went round the Northern Province would need a separate
volume and so it must wait. But so much now has been said
about my encounter with a lion that I think I should tell it
here in my own words. In those good old days, teachers
were not barred from holding office in the Congress and so
I stopped at Mundu Lower Middle School where my old
classmate Ason Charles Bwalya was headmaster and was also
Branch Chairman. I addressed a meeting that evening. Early
in the morning, I set off for Isoka Boma where I was
scheduled to address a public meeting that evening. I had a
very worried mind, a mind that was expecting something
bad. I had gone about five miles when something passed
me at a terrible speed and I almost fell off my bicycle since
my mind was already in a frightened state, only to see a
young smiling boy in front of me. Mr Bwalya had sent him
to bring a pair of my heavy boots which I had left at his
school. From there I tried to force myself to dismiss this
fear by thinking it was all imagination, but the weight of
foreboding was still there at the back of my mind. As I
53

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

pushed my bicycle slowly I heard some noise from my left
and then saw just about five feet in front of me a big lizard
running faster than I had ever known lizards to run and
close on its tail a big snake. I applied my brakes firmly and
threw my bicycle down, but by the time I had done this the
two had already gone. I started going on, more dragging
myself than pedalling. I had gone about a mile from this
place when I began to go uphill. To make matters worse,
there was far too much sand to be able to ride and just after a
bend, I saw from a distance of about a hundred yards what
looked like a big monkey. It jumped from the north bank on
the road and had obviously not seen me. The time must have
been about eleven in the morning. It stood still for a moment
or two and then moved on to the middle of the road. It
quickly took a glance in both directions and it saw me and
I realized immediately that my four-legged friend was no
monkey, but a lion. To my great surprise the fear that had
been haunting me quickly gave way to a feeling of strength
and boldness. The beast stared at me as I advanced towards
it. I must have been about twenty yards from it when I
stopped. It continued to stare at me without making the
slightest movement. I rang my bicycle bell and shouted but
it still stood still and stared at me. It was of a fine brown
colour and the mane showed clearly that it was full grown. I
took my cycle pump and hit almost every part of my bicycle
but the animal did not even wink as far as I could see. I
don’t know why, but all of a sudden I lifted my heavily
laden bicycle as if to cross a stream without a bridge and
waved it over my head with both my hands. This was too
much for the King of Beasts; he made one leap and dis¬
appeared as quickly as he had come. I put my bicycle down,
walked on and as soon as I left the sandy part of the road, I
54

SECRETARY-GENERAL

OF

CONGRESS

rode it once again to arrive in time for my Isoka meeting.
In this way I went round the Province meeting Chiefs,
village headmen, teachers, traders, farmers, clerks and the
ordinary members of the public. Wherever I could, I formed
branches of the Congress. In August ickt, I was elected
Secretary-General of the African Natiopal Congress and
moved to Lusaka.

9
Secretary-General of Congress

During 1953 we continued our battle against Federation with
a petition to the Queen in April, signed by one hundred and
twenty chiefs. Seeking her intervention we wrote:
We need your protection until there is a Government in
this country in which we shall feel safe. ... We can
see that the Europeans are trying to bring us under the
same domination as our brother Africans in Southern
Rhodesia and South Africa; and to hold us there for ever
as cheap labourers without hope of progress. We cannot
accept this for our children. . . .
We added a note to this petition which stated that the
Paramount Chief of the Barotse had not accepted Federation

55

/

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

but had agreed not to contest its imposition provided the
Protectorate status of Barotseland was assured.
Enclosing this petition, we wrote to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, and the Lord Chancellor of the House
. of Lords, pointing out that among the signatories to the
petition were the legal successors to those Chiefs who
originally entrusted our territories to the Government of the
\ United Kingdom. We drew attention to the fact that in the
referendum conducted in Southern Rhodesia which had
declared in favour of Federation, the white population,
numbering 128,000, had approximately 49,000 voters on the
electoral roll, while the African population of nearly
2,000,000 had 429 voters on the roll. Also, in the Legislative
Councils of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, to whom the
question was next referred, there were only two Africans in
each Council in memberships of 23 and 18 respectively. All
the African members had voted and spoken strongly against
the scheme. We went on to declare that the imposition of
Federation would be contrary to the United Nations Charter
and especially to Article 73 of that Charter and we appealed
for a hearing at the Bar of the House of Commons or by
Select Committee of both Houses of Parliament.
As everyone knows, our appeals went unheard and the
time arrived for elections to the Federal Parliament. In my
V press communique of 13 October 1953 I said:
In Central Africa a major constitutional change has been
imposed against the expressed wish of some six million
Africans in favour of a handful of reactionary white
settlers. This imposition has only been possible because
the imperialists count on the strength of the British troops
which they are ruthlessly using in crushing down the
national aspirations of the colonial peoples. Nay, they have
56

SECRETARY-GENERAL

OF

CONGRESS

not solved the problem. They have only managed to shelve
the inevitable racial strife in Central Africa. Serious trouble
lies ahead. The imposition of Federation has made this
trouble more certain than ever.
Nevertheless, we decided to co-operate in these elections.
In the same communique I wrote:
If we Africans are decided to continue fighting against
human injustice, we will be well advised to link up our
national movements with the established foreign parlia¬
mentary system. We must see to it that more and more
of our men find their way to the parliamentary institu¬
tion whilst on the other hand we intensify our national
aspirations.
We were afraid that if the African organizations boy¬
cotted the elections the Federal Parliament might change
the constitution after Federation so as to enable Governors
of each territory to nominate African stooges. So, far from
being defeated by the imposition of Federation, we called
Congress to ever more vigorous action. At this time I was
sending out regular circulars to Branch officials in which I
did my best to encourage our people for the long struggle
that I knew lay ahead of us.
But much of the time our struggle was misunderstood and
our actions misrepresented and this has led to great bitter¬
ness and often to disturbances such as those in the Gwembe
Valley, Luapula and the Northern Province, where Congress
was blamed for stirring up trouble which arose from other
causes. The Congress organizer regarded himself honestly
as a worker in the cause of freedom and a means through
which the frustrations of the people could express themselves.

57

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

The ‘common man’ of Zambia had no member of parlia¬
ment to whom he could make his complaints when he felt he
was being unjustly treated. He found himself being swept
along in the current of change brought about by the coming
of the settler to his country. His old safe world was falling
in ruins about him and in his bewilderment he had no¬
where to turn to. Congress regarded itself as the means
through which African people could express their legitimate
aspirations.
On the other side, the Government, in the person of the
District Commissioner and his staff, regarded the ‘Congress
man’ as a trouble maker who was trying to thwart all he was
trying to do for the betterment of the people he had been
sent to work amongst. Under the system of Indirect Rule, the
Provincial Administration (i.e., District Commissioners
and District Officers, collectively known amongst us as the
P.A.), carried out its work through the local Chiefs and
their Native Authorities. The African National Congress
could not qualify as a political party because the mass of
Africans were not voters and it came to be regarded as a
kind of subversive organization whose object was simply to
cause trouble. The Central Government dare not ban the
organization because thatWouIdTiIve~caused such a rumpus
overseas, so they tried to deal with it through the Chiefs and
the Local Authorities. Some day, I should like to write a
book with the old Congress files at my elbow to tell the
wretched story of how the Provincial Administration tried
to use the Chiefs to crush Congress in the rural areas.
In order to illustrate this I have included (pp. 186-96) the
full report on the disturbances in the Gwembe Valley. It is a
terrible story of misunderstanding and oppression. What the
well-meaning, imperialist D.C.s have never understood is
58

With my wife singing Christmas carols at home 1961

Myself at Chilenje

SECRETARY-GENERAL

OF

CONGRESS

that Africans are people, not cattle to be herded together and
driven here and there. When the bewildered rural people
did not immediately do all the things that the D.C. wished
them to do for their own good, he decided to force them into
goodness by Native Authority Orders. I know from my own
experience that the people of Zambia are ordinary human
beings with prejudices and fears but with intelligence and a
great longing to improve their position. With patience and
understanding, people can be led into a better land and the
Canaan of their dreams, but they will fight back if you try to
push them faster than they want to go.
I do not by any means put the blame on the D.C.s per¬
sonally. I know many of them are good men and I count
some as my friends; but they are forced to carry out a system
that sets them into opposition to the very people they are
supposed to guide with a fatherly hand. For example, at the
time of the imposition of Federation, the D.C.s and the
D.O.s had to travel round their districts to persuade the
people to accept it. Some D.C.s have told me they did this
very unwillingly. If a man is to become a friend to the people,
to lead them to better things, he must know their language,
yet the Central Government has a terrible record of shifting
their Provincial Officers from one language area to another,
never giving them time to lead and guide. For example, the
Chinsali District, where the worst troubles happened in 1961,
has had nineteen changes of District Commissioners and
District Officers in ten years.

c

59

10

A Time of Frustration

During 1954, I realized that some constructive thinking
would have to be done if Congress was going to hold to¬
gether. People were saying that now Federation had become
an accomplished fact, we could never break it and therefore
we had no reason to continue our fight.
We decided to draw up a five-year plan and, accordingly,
I sent out a circular in which I said that the past three years
had seen a wonderful fight against Federation. The only
good thing about Federation was the unity it had brought
amongst us, and now people must learn that although
Federation had been imposed upon us, this national move¬
ment to advance Africans politically, economically and
socially must go on. All our efforts had been thrown into the
fight against Federation. Now what next? Our five-year
Development Plan would be launched officially on 1 Sep¬
tember 1955.1 concluded the circular with an appeal for sup¬
port and for advice.
Later in the year we discovered that although we lived in
what was called a Central African Federation, as Africans we
were restricted in our movements. When Harry Nkumbula
and I arrived in Salisbury to attend a meeting of the four
African members of the Federal Parliament who represented
Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, we were each issued
with a deportation order at the airport. We were called
60

A

TIME

OF

FRUSTRATION

Alien Natives. How can you be an alien if you are also a
native of the country ? I have this order before me as I write.
It is headed:
Order for the Expulsion of an Alien Native from the
Colony of Southern Rhodesia in terms of Section 2 (1) of the
Deportation of Aliens Act: (Chapter 61).
and states:
Kenneth David Kaunda
Whereas I deem it conducive to the public good that you,
who are an alien, should not remain within the borders of
the Colony of Southern Rhodesia,
Now, therefore, under and by virtue of the powers con¬
ferred upon me by the Deportation of Aliens Act (Chapter
61), I do hereby direct that you do leave the Colony aforesaid
within one hour of the service upon you of this order.

R. C. Tregold.
Officer administering the Government.
Dated at Salisbury this 20th day of August 1954Mr Nkumbula’s warrant of expulsion from Southern
Rhodesia dated as far back as March 1953. Mine was issued
on 20 August 1954, only four days previously. This seemed
strange to us since Mr Nkumbula had been down to Salisbury
during July the previous year and was not arrested.
We felt very bitter about this and, in my next circular, I
commented as follows: ‘It is anyone’s guess to see the main
reason why they didn’t touch Mr Nkumbula that time Federation had not been imposed as yet; now that it is, what
have they to fear?’
The European press in Northern Rhodesia constantly
61

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

refers to the destructive forces of an exclusive black
nationalism. Yet in September 1954, at the same time that I
was writing so bitterly about Federation, I was preparing
for Congress a scheme for an Inter-Racial College in
Northern Rhodesia. The first Non-Racial College of Adult
Education is in process of being built as I write this, seven
vears later.
As the year went on I drafted further resolutions addressed
to the Secretary for Native Affairs and continuously strove to
improve our organization. In my work as Secretary-General
of Congress, I had been conscious for a long time of the need
to have our own newspaper. Late in 1953, it was decided by
the National Executive Council that a newspaper would help
Congress both for propaganda work and as a source of in¬
come. An editorial board consisting of Titus Mukupo, W. K.
Sikalumbi and myself was formed. The major problem, of
course, that we faced was lack of finance. We went round all
the printing presses in Lusaka but, of course, their estimates
for printing a paper were far above anything we could
afford. We decided to produce a cyclostyled monthly paper,
Congress News, the first copy of which appeared in October
1953 at a loss.
Shortly after the second issue in November, both the
President-General Mr Nkumbula and I were arrested for
printing a newspaper without registering it. The Criminal
Investigation Headquarters were, however, not aware that
the Postmaster-General had been written to by us and had
replied saying that he could not register it since it was
roncoed and not printed. When we explained this, we were
released but forbidden to publish our paper again ‘until
further notice’. This ‘further notice’ was not squeezed out
of the authorities until we had got some friendly members
J

62

A

TIME

OF

FRUSTRATION

of Parliament to bring pressure to bear on the Colonial
Secretary.
We frequently issued press communiques which were not
always accorded much attention. In view of all the talk that
is going on as I write this, about the possibility of splitting
up Northern Rhodesia, I think it is worth recording that as
early as 1954 I gave my reasons for rejecting any kind of
partition by showing the obvious impracticability of the
Van Eeden plan for separate African and White States.
If accepted, the Van Eeden partition plan would have
meant a complete defeat of the still possible integration of
men and women of different colours - a principle towards
which men and women are struggling in many parts of the
world today. So we fought the Van Eeden scheme tooth
and nail and I’m glad to say it was never seriously counten¬
anced.
Early in 1955, I went to prison for the first time. The
events which fed up to this are worth relating because they
show that the authorities, which were hounding our organ¬
izers in the Provinces, were determined to get some of us at
headquarters behind bars. Their opportunity came when
they discovered that we held some prohibited literature in
our office.
For some months, we had been receiving from a member
of Parliament in London, copies of a magazine, Africa and
the Colonial World. A request came that our statement in
the Gwembe disturbances should be published in this maga¬
zine and, of course, we agreed. Unfortunately, the editor of
the Central African Post, Frank Barton, who was later to
become my very good friend, saw a copy of this and raised
a hue and cry with the result that this magazine became a
‘prohibited publication’. I wrote to the British member of

63

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Parliament asking what we should do with the magazine
since we had been sent a number of copies for distribution.
He replied that we should send them to Southern Rhodesia
where the publication had not been banned. I realized they
ought to be disposed of so I bundled the whole lot up and
put them on a shelf in the office. I scribbled on the wrapping
a note to the effect that they should either be sent to Southern
Rhodesia or taken to the Urban District Commissioner,
Lusaka, to be disposed of, then I forgot about them. On
6 January 1955, shortly after I returned from a long tour, I
was in bed when my wife woke me and said two Europeans
wished to see me. I thought they were press men so I got
up, put on shorts and vest and went out, and a European
asked me to go to his car. As we walked along he said,
‘Kenneth, we are asking you to go to your office.’
He was carrying a blue piece of paper and said he had a
warrant to search my house, but that we should go to the
office first.
At the office one of the white men read me a blue paper
to the effect that he had the right to search. He asked me
and I said I had no objection. Sikalumbi, the Deputy
Treasurer, was also there. We got inside and the search
began. One of the white men went to where the pack¬
ages were, found them, and appeared to be satisfied. Next,
my table was searched and a big envelope addressed to Mr. G.
Kaluwa was found and put in a suitcase belonging to a
European. Before that, Mr Nkumbula, who was PresidentGeneral of my organization, had arrived with other white
men and asked me if the packages were still there. I said,
‘Yes, unfortunately, I have not been able to deal with them.’
Mr Nkumbula and I were sentenced to two months’
imprisonment with hard labour.
64

A

TIME

OF

FRUSTRATION

1955 was an unsatisfactory year from the point of view of
Congress activity. I spent much of my time on organization
but it was difficult to maintain the enthusiasm of our
branches. A number of our organizers in the Provinces were
jailed for various offences. I tried to set out for our members
the reasons for joining our movement, and sent out the
following circular:

Your membership of the African National Congrc^
entered now, will help make possible
y the fight for the franchise;
^the fight against colour discrimination in public places
like post offices, hotels, rest rooms, eating places,
theatres, parks, playgrounds and many others;
the fight to get Africans safeguarded against the prevail¬
ing police brutality and unlawful arrests;
? the fight for getting higher posts for Africans in the
Protectorate’s and Federal Civil Services, and in military
and police forces according to merit and not according
to their colour;
i the fight for better treatment of our Chiefs in the way of
allowances as we declared at the August 1952 Con¬
ference and to stop all intimidation and ill-treatment of
Chiefs and their Native Authority servants by Govern¬
ment officials;
-,.the fight for more and better educational and health
facilities and to fight for free economic progress of
Africans both in urban and rural areas;
•‘"the fight against the establishment of a common native
policy for the Federation;
the fight against the final stage of this dreadful monster
Federation which is intended to be a Central African
Dominion, in other words the fight for remaining a
Protectorate under the direct control of the Colonial

65

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Office until we are ready to participate fully in the run¬
ning of our Protectorate’s affairs;
in short, all the above mean the fight for self-guards and
not safeguards by someone else!
Once again, we say to you join now and give today and
become a member of this national movement. If you join,
you add yourself to some 105 Chiefs, 500 Native Authori¬
ties’ servants, 3,000 village headmen and 37,000 men,
women and children. You become a member for as little as:
Ladies
6d. entrance fee, is. 6d. annual subscription
Men
is. 6d.
„
„ 2s. 6d.
„
„
Students and
children 3d.
,,
„ is. od.
„
,,
But you may give us as much as you li\e!

During this year, the Government increased the pressure
and a Bill was introduced into the Legislative Council to
amend the Public Order Ordinance. We held two big meet¬
ings at Kabwata to protest against this Ordinance. The first
one was held before the Ordinance became law, but obviously
the authorities were beginning to take more notice of what
we were saying at these meetings, because six white men led
by a Welfare Officer attended the meeting. The second
meeting was attended by two uniformed policemen. Of
course, as the years went by and our organization grew in
strength, policemen always attended our open-air meetings
and took down what we said on tape recorders.
But it was not the police at our meetings which caused us
most concern at this time. All the power of the press and
radio was turned on to discredit us. A small incident illus¬
trates this. In Government Communique 118 of the African
News Service which was distributed to the press and to all

66

A

TIME

OF

FRUSTRATION

African reading rooms, it was reported that a well-known
member of the African National Congress had been sent to
jail in the Northern Province for four years for setting fire
to a store at Chinsali. In fact this man, Kosam Mwamba, had
never been a member of Congress. In one of my circulars I
exposed this deliberate attempt to discredit us, and said
that we hated violence and believed that it did not pay.
The Government did not like the things we were saying
and yet they did not dare to silence us completely, so they
employed their usual methods of working through Chiefs.
For example a motion was introduced into the Ilamfya
Council, which is composed of Bemba Chiefs, to the effect
that African politicians should first get permission from the
Chief before holding a meeting in any Chief’s area. Some
government officials who attended the meeting spoke in
favour of the motion, but it was heavily defeated.
The Bemba representatives opposed the motion on the
ground that European politicians are permitted to hold meet¬
ings in any part of the Colony, without obtaining permission
from the Government. I learnt from a very reliable source
that the motion was brought to the Ilamfya Council, the
supreme Council of Chiefs in LuBemba, by one of the Chiefs
who had been persuaded to do so by the D.C. himself. This
Chief twice refused to take this motion to the Ilamfya
Council but on the third occasion reluctantly agreed.
Perhaps because of the ever-increasing support Congress
was receiving from the masses of Africans from all walks of
life, Government was angered and, who knows, perhaps a
little frightened too. I said at the time:
We want

to

remind people in authority that

when

PEOPLE UNDERSTAND A CAUSE, BECOME PREPARED TO SUFFER

67

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

FOR THAT CAUSE AND SEE GLORY AND HONOUR IN SUCH SUFFER¬
ING, IT IS INDEED JUST IMPOSSIBLE TO SUPPRESS THEM OR THE
cause they stand for. More and more Africans are seeing
the cause this Congress stands for as right, and so are add¬
ing themselves to it. In view of this, our best piece of New
Year advice to Government is this; that the best way of
destroying the African National Congress is not by banish¬
ing it violently but by removing as much of what forms
Congress’s platform as they can possibly manage, and
plenty can be done, for is not much of our racial conflict
brought about by colour discrimination ? Does this colour
discrimination not bring about frustration and confusion
in the minds of the victims? Don’t they see that once they
get together, speak and act as one, some good might result ?
Africans, like any other human beings, are refusing to
allow anyone to make their colour the basis of discrimina¬
tion against them. They no longer will allow anyone to
make them third or fourth class citizens in the country of
their birth.
We wish to draw the attention of Government to this
important fact that once they banish Congress, they shall
I have succeeded only in driving African nationalism under' ground; and, as every thinking person knows, under¬
ground movements are not pleasant movements for any¬
one anywhere, and it is our sincere hope and prayer that
people in authority will not abuse their privileged positions
for the temporary satisfaction of one section of this multi¬
racial society.

During 1955, we who had almost given up hope of any
encouragement from white Liberals were delighted to find
Dr Scott, the Federal member of Parliament for Lusaka,
championing the same cause as ourselves. I gave full promi¬
nence to his statements in one of my Congress circulars, and

68

A

TIME

OF

FRUSTRATION

emphasized that Dr Scott had, both in and out of Parlia¬
ment, pressed governments in Central Africa to adopt a more
liberal attitude towards the indigenous people. His appeals
had fallen on deaf ears and instead the privileged class and
legislators had raised more and more oppressive legislation
in an attempt to stop the indigenous people demanding their
legitimate rights. I pointed out that we were preserving
patience and appealed once again to the leaders of the privi¬
leged classes to do something about the ‘many wrongs that
are committed against us on grounds of colour, before our
people lose patience’.
By 1956, our African National Congress was getting down
seriously to work out the kind of constitution we thought
fitting for our country. In view of Zambia’s rejection of the
1958 constitution imposed by Lennox Boyd it is necessary
to give in detail our own proposals, and these are contained
in Appendix (III, p. 17b).
We also madd "suggestions for a revision of the Federal
constitution, in a Memorandum on the fallure of the Federal
government to provide higher education for Africansand
of the Northern Rhodesian government to provide secondary
schools. In this memorandum we pointed out that the Federal

government had reduced the number of grants and scholar¬
ships provided in the past for overseas higher education of
Africans, and that it was the wish of Africans that the ques¬
tion of their higher education should no longer be an item
of Federal legislation, but should become a territorial item.
While Uganda had more than 200 Africans doing university
courses in the United Kingdom, Northern Rhodesia had
only about ten receiving any education there. This was par¬
ticularly surprising when the revenues of the two countries
were compared.
69

ZAMBIA

'w

SHALL

BE

FREE

We went on to complain that the multi-racial character
of the Rhodesian university had been departed from in plan¬
ning to house European and African students in separate
hostels. Furthermore, several South Africans had been
appointed to the staff of the university, but no African hadbeen appointed.
On the question of the provision of candidates for the
university, we stressed the need to extend and develop
secondary schools. There were no African secondary schools
for girls, and it appeared that there would be no African
women in the university for many years. The only junior
secondary school for girls was at Chipembi Mission. In fact,
the education of girls in Northern Rhodesia was so much
neglected that nearly all the African hospital nurses and
trainees were from Southern Rhodesia.
As far as technical education and training was concerned,
progress was so' slow that Africans found it difficult to take
advantage of the agreed plan for advancement in the mines
and in other branches of industry. The memorandum ended,
‘If the government of Northern Rhodesia has the principle
of Partnership at all at heart it must give Africans the same
opportunity and standard of technical education and training as the Europeans. There is no apprenticeship scheme for
Africans in any industry in Northern Rhodesia. Africans are
explicitly excluded from the terms of the Apprenticeship
Ordinance. (See Cap. 187. Laws of Northern Rhodesia Sec¬
tion 3, 2 (a).) The mass education of adults, of great import¬
ance to a community seeking a fuller franchise, has been
allowed to die out for lack of government support and
enthusiasm.’

70

African Opinion

When the Second World War ended, the question of the
further industrial development of Northern and Southern
Rhodesia became a matter of urgent concern. It was essen¬
tial thaFTnll use should be made of the large rivers for the
production of electrical power, as well as for purposes of
irrigation.
In Northern Rhodesia, the plan which met with most
support was for the harnessing of the; Kafue river, not very
far from the point where it flows into the Zambezi, so that
electrical power might be produced, and the fertile land
irrigated farther up the river. In Southern Rhodesia, the
idea was to make use of the Kariba Gorge, through which
the Zambezi river flows.
By the time the question of Federation began to be seriously
considered, the Northern Rhodesian Government had
already spent considerable sums of the taxpayers’ money on
the preliminary works required for the Kafue scheme, such
as the construction of an approach road. Sir Godfrey
Huggins, then prime minister of Southern Rhodesia, was
believed to have given an undertaking that the acceptance
of Federation would not be allowed to interfere with the
Kafue plan which was expected to be of such great benefit
to Northern Rhodesia.
However, later on when independent French experts were

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

called in they declared for the far more ambitious and much
more costly Kariba scheme, and little more was heard of the
Kafue. This may well have been the correct decision under
the circumstances, but at the time a good deal of ill-feeling
was aroused in Northern Rhodesia. Business men in Lusaka
were particularly bitter about it.
On 17 November 1955, acting on the instructions of the
Executive Council of Congress, Mr Nkumbula sent a peti¬
tion to the Queen on behalf of the people of the Zambezi
Valley, who were being dispossessed of their land to make
way for the Kariba Gorge hydro-electric scheme. It was
pointed out that the whole of the land within 200 miles
upstream of the Kariba Gorge, on the Northern Rhodesian
bank of the Zambezi was either Native Reserve, or Native
Trust Land, and as such was set aside ‘for the sole use and
benefit, direct and indirect, of the natives of Northern
Rhodesia’. The Queen was asked to instruct the Secretary of
State for the Colonies to consider fully the security and well¬
being of the people of the Zambezi Valley, who were living
under Her Majesty’s protection. He should determine, for
example, whether it was just that the people should be dis¬
possessed of their land, and whether the Kariba project was
for the benefit of the natives of Northern Rhodesia. Tlx
question of compensation to be paid to the 29,000 people of
Northern Rhodesia, and 14,000 of Southern Rhodesia, who
were to lose their homes, was also mentioned; and the sug¬
gestion was made, that a Commission be set up to examine
and determine the various points raised. As everyone now
knows, the Kariba project was quickly carried through, and
resulted in the formation of an enormous lake, completely
swamping the area above the dam, which had been the home
of thousands of Africans for many generations.
72

AFRICAN

OPINION

African opinion in Northern Rhodesia, completely flouted
on the Kariba project, was unable to make itself properly
felt even in smaller ways. In urban areas, opinion was sup¬
posed to be voiced by the urban Advisory Councils. To these,
Africans were elected on the ward system, and the Council
was presided over by the local District Commissioner. These
Councils had no executive functions. They met once a month
to consider a prepared agenda when matters of local interest
and complaints and grievances were considered. It was then
for the District Commissioner, if he thought fit to do so, to
take such action or make such representations as he con¬
sidered to be necessary. He was their sole mouthpiece.
For the remedying of the grievances of the great African
consumer population in the Protectorate, the Advisory
Councils have proved useless, and the only body which was
prepared to put up a serious fight in the interest of the African
consumer was the Congress. We in Congress in 1953 started
a militant campaign of protest against apartheid in the
post offices and the shops. Ignoring all notices to the con¬
trary, we invaded shops and post offices in large numbers
and soon forced the abolition of segregation.
There was a trader at Kasama in Northern Eastern
Rhodesia, who had a chain of stores through the district. We
received numerous complaints about his treatment of African
customers. They were, it was said, bullied, ill-treated and
insulted. He was said, on one occasion, to have caused the
death of an African. Congress instituted a boycott which
was so effective that, after enduring it for some months, the
trader sold out. His successor was more amenable; peace was
made and there has been no further trouble. Our Congress
organizer, Makasa, however, went to jail for 18 months for
organizing this boycott. The year 1956 marked a campaign

73

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

of boycott in most of the towns in Northern Rhodesia. In all
the cases, before commencing operations, Congress sent a
letter to the local Chamber of Commerce mentioning its
complaints and asking for a conference at which these com¬
plaints could be discussed and remedied. In every case, the
answer the Chamber of Commerce gave was that it was not
prepared to meet the Congress or its leaders, but that griev¬
ances, if they existed, could be handled by the local Urban
Advisory Council. Our answer was to refuse to accept this
position, and boycotts which followed were almost uniformly
effective as far as African consumers were concerned. In
Chingola, after a boycott had started, the local Chamber of
Commerce agreed to meet the local branch of Congress. A
conference was held and the boycott was at once called off.
In refusing to recognize or meet the Congress, the Chamber
of Commerce, composed entirely of European and Asian
traders, were, we understood, following a lead given to
them by the Northern Rhodesian government.
The European and Asian bodies of traders did not take
the boycotts lying down. Complaints were made to the
Government, and whatever action was considered possible
was taken against the boycotters. In the Kasama case for
instance, three or four of our members were convicted of
conspiracy and sent to prison for long terms. In most of the
other local boycotts, individual pickets, or the more zealous
enforcers of the boycott, were sent to prison on charges of
assault or intimidation.
Matters came to a head at Mufulira on the Copperbelt in
May 1956. The local committee wrote to the Chamber of
Commerce'on 23 May setting out a substantial list of griev¬
ances felt by the African consumers, and asked the Chamber
to meet it. The Chamber sent a reply refusing to meet the

74

AFRICAN

OPINION

committee but expressing its willingness to meet the local
Advisory Council. We refused to accept this position and a
boycott commenced on n June, being, so far as the African
customers were concerned, ioo per cent effective. This time
the protests of the commercial community stirred an appar¬
ently reluctant Government to action. A prosecution for
conspiracy was instituted against the two leading members
of the local committee, the Deputy Provincial President, and
the senior Provincial President for the Western Province.
This fourth man, Edward Mungoni, was arrested by the
police in Lusaka, handcuffed to an African constable,
marched through the streets to the railway station, taken by
train to Ndola and there, similarly handcuffed, again
marched through the streets on several occasions. This un¬
necessarily harsh treatment acted, as it was bound to act, very
considerably to exacerbate African feelings on the Copperbelt.
On this occasion, we decided to fight. We engaged the
services of a senior member of the Salisbury Bar, and the
matter was heard before the magistrate of Mufulira on 3 and
4 July. The case for the Crown was that the conspiracy was a
malicious one, inasmuch as all legitimate grievances which
the African consumer population were labouring under
could have been remedied through some official channels
upon their being represented to the African Advisory Council
of Mufulira. Stress was laid upon the fact that the first three
defendants in the case, who were the principal officials of
the African National Congress in Mufulira, were also mem¬
bers of the Urban Advisory Council of that town. There¬
fore it was said, when the Chamber of Commerce refused to
meet the local African National Congress, it was not actually
refusing to meet these three persons as it would have met

75

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

them in their other capacity as members of the Council.
This being so, it was argued there was no substance in the
complaint that the African National Congress had been
ignored and, therefore, the calling of the boycott was mali¬
cious. It was called, so the Prosecutor said, not in the legiti¬
mate protection of consumer interests in Mufulira, but in
pursuance of a campaign to enforce recognition of the African
National Congress.
No attempt was made by the principal Crown witnesses,
who were the D.C. and the Secretary of the Chamber of
Commerce, to deny the existence or validity of the grievances
set out in the Congress letter of 23 May. After the boycott
started, price inspectors went to Mufulira and three of the
twenty-four European tradesmen there were convicted of
overcharging or giving short weight. In the butchers’ shops
meat was wrapped into parcels at specific prices, and African
customers were expected to buy these parcels without know¬
ing, or being given an opportunity of knowing what was in
them. Any African who insisted upon opening the parcel
before buying would receive short shrift.
Forty-pound bags of mealie meal, which is our staple food,
would be delivered to European customers free of charge,
but Africans would be expected to take their own delivery,
I though prices were the same. The hatchwayjysl£ra^ynder
which Africans were not allowed into shops but had to take
their purchases through a small opening on to the street,
had mainly disappeared throughnuFtherterritory, due to the
African National Congress campaigns, but it still persisted
in sonje cases in Mufulira. When taxed about rudeness to
African customers, the Chamber admitted that many of its
junior assistants were rude, but, somewhat naively, added
that they were rude to Europeans as well. And so the list
76

AFRICAN

OPINION

of grievances piled up, and the D.C. in cross-examination
admitted that all of them were legitimate and called for a
remedy.
The magistrate, in passing judgment, acquitted all the
accused and declared that he had no hesitation in saying \
that the boycotters had sufficient justification for their action. V
There was no evidence, he said, that the boycott had been organized to force recognition of the Congress. The evidence
showed that its object was to redress the grievances of the
African consumer.
A crowd of about 300 Africans gave an ovation to the
Congress President Mr H. Nkumbula and the four accused
when they came out of the court room, and there can be no
doubt that the successful outcome of the trial gave an enor¬
mous boost to Congress throughout the entire African popu¬
lation of Northern Rhodesia. So much is this the case that it
can seriously be doubted whether the law department of
Northern Rhodesia was wise in instituting the prosecution.
It knew, or could have known had it made due enquiry, that
the grievances of the African consumer population were
undeniable and weighty, and it should have known there¬
fore that the prospects of securing a conviction were slight.
Immense pressure may have been brought to bear upon it
by the trading bodies concerned, but it should have had the
strength and wisdom to resist this pressure.
This case showed up in a high light the dangerous dualism
of control which exists at the present moment-in Northern
Rhodesia. There is the Federal government which professes
to follow a policy of racial partnership. There is the terri¬
torial government, under which comes the department of
justice, which must bear the responsibility in a large manner
for the state of affairs revealed by the Mufulira case, and
77

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

which, apparently, is responsible for the attitude of the
Chambers of Commerce in refusing to recognize or meet
Congress.
The primary objective of Congress is to improve the lot of
the up-to-now badly exploited African, either by negotiation,
or by action, where negotiation fails. In this way, the gap
between the privileged and the underdog is being narrowed;
and the narrower the gap, the greater chance there is of the
different races living together in peace and harmony.
The African is more sure today of what he is doing than
he has ever been. This confidence in himself is mounting
every day so people would do well to co-operate with him.
Any student of history will recognize and understand it.
It was there in India, in Burma, in Ghana, and in many
other countries. Where it was handled properly it brought
peace and harmony between men of colour and where it
was not, it brought disaster for everybody. Our situation
today demands statesmanship of the first order.
Northern Rhodesia is a country of deep-rooted contrasts,
deep-rooted because everything has been planned on apart¬
heid lines, everything has been running, is running and
within the foreseeable future will continue to run, on those
lines. In this lies the root of all the present trouble. This
‘apartheid’ of political, economic and social planning is
admittedly more pronounced here because it takes racial
lines and so must be faced as such. It is difficult for one who
is genuinely interested in making multi-racialism successful
to think of those at the helm of the governments concerned
as being serious-minded about the racial problem.
It is useless merely to express pious hopes, or to persist in
calling us agitators and self-seekers. Shall we be up to the
mark and draw practical examples of what has been taking
78

AFRICAN

OPINION

place in other countries recently? In Kenya, Kenyatta and
his assistants who were called names were removed and
punished, result - there was no responsible African national¬
ist leader to negotiate with, and the terrible and sad suffer¬
ing that has befallen Kenya resulted. In Uganda, the Kabaka
was removed as a possible agitator and trouble-maker with
the sad results we all know. In Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios
and his friends were removed in the firm hope that once they
were taken away all would be well. When we draw these
examples let it not be thought that we are planning violence.
These are facts which must be examined very carefully. We
put them forward in the firm belief that we may profit as a
country from the sad history of our friends.
Now, what do these so-called African malcontents, agita¬
tors and self-styled leaders do? Who are these people who
go to prison, or suffer detention, even after courts have
found them innocent? Who are these people who sacrifice
comfort for bullets? Is there any personal gain or joy in
knowing that these terrible things await one ? In all sincerity
there is none. Yet these people go out and tell their own folk
that they are not paid enough, they live in slums, they have
had bad schools, bad hospitals; they are discriminated
against in all public places because they are not represented
in councils that plan their destinies, and all this because they
happen to be black. They tell them that unless they can
organize themselves in the same way as white men are they
will for ever remain where they are. Africans see that they
are only attended to after organizing themselves and taking
positive action. After promised reforms, after Royal Com¬
missions have gone into the issues concerned, the findings
and recommendations are set aside simply because settlers
shout against them. African leaders are blamed by their own
79

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

followers for having negotiated with those in power who
fail to keep their word. The people in power are destroying
all future chances for negotiation.
We now come to the second part of the question, ‘Why do
they go about organizing their people in the way they do ? ’
The answer to this is short and simple. They do so for
exactly the same reasons as white politicians and trade union¬
ists, to safeguard the interests of their people.
The third question and obviously the most important in
the circumstances is, ‘What should be done?’ In the past,
we have told those concerned that the answer lay in removing
African grievances in the industrial, social and political
spheres and we feel it is a sheer waste of time to say anything
more.

12

Visit to the United Kingdom

I shall always remember the year 195,7* It was then that I
visited the United Kingdom for the first time. I was invited
by the Labour party to attend a socialist conference. Mr
Nkumbula and I left Northern Rhodesia for Britain on 26
May, and arrived in London the following day. We spent
the early part of our visit at the Commonwealth Conference
organized by the Labour party at the Beatrice Webb House
80

VISIT

TO

THE

UNITED

KINGDOM

in Dorking, Surrey. This conference was attended by dele¬
gates from 26 countries. They came from independent states
like Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Ghana; others
came from semi-independent states like Nigeria, and the
rest from countries still under foreign control like Northern
Rhodesia. Generally speaking, all delegates were, to varying
degrees, believers in socialist ideals.
We used our spare time interesting prominent delegates
like Dr Evatt, Leader of the Opposition in the Australian
Parliament (Labour party), in our problems, and the discus¬
sion usually resulted in serious condemnation of the Central
African Federation.
After the conference, we busied ourselves addressing
M.P.s and various interested groups of people in our prob¬
lems. We sought an appointment with the Colonial Secre¬
tary, but the Kenya constitutional crisis interfered with our
arrangements and before we could meet the Colonial Secre¬
tary Mr Nkumbula had to return home leaving me to con¬
tinue with the work.
As both the co-operative movement and local government
study needed more time than I was allowed, I decided to do
a short study of British political institutions with emphasis
on ‘Party Organization’. I chose to examine the organiza-j
tion of the British Labour party with a view to ascertaining
what lessons, if any, could be drawn for the improved work¬
ing of the African National Congress of Northern Rhodesia.
It must be remembered, however, that the Labour party was
then over 50 years old; it works in a community where edu¬
cational standards are high, where an exceptionally high
level of political tolerance has been achieved and where the
population is, for the sake of this argument, homogeneous.
Above all, the Labour party is subject to no disabilities in
81

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

law which are not incumbent upon any other political
parties, and a universal adult franchise operates in an atmo¬
sphere where freedom of speech, writing and association are
accepted as part of the natural order of the universe. A far
cry from Northern Rhodesia!
I went ahead, making our problems known. I addressed
meetings, large and small, in different cities and towns. I
spoke to M.P.s, mainly Labour, trade unionists, clergymen,
professors, press men and many other influential groups of
people. Great interest and sympathy was shown. Their com¬
mon request was, ‘Please keep us well posted and we will
do what we can to help you.’ On the whole, I found the
British public becoming more and more concerned with
our problems and I recommended to Congress on my return
the idea of having our own, well-informed representative
in Britain during the next three years. It was important that
we should do so. The Federal government at Rhodesia House
Was using very intensive propaganda to hoodwink the
jBritish public into believing that the economic case they
were giving wide publicity to, was advantageous to all inhabi¬
tants of the Federation. They painted us as extremists who
had no regard for human values and whose sole interest
was to gain political power so we could drive white people
into the sea. Cheap as these tactics were, they succeeded
in causing a great deal of fear in certain influential
circles.
I found that six months was not long enough to get to
understand thoroughly the intricate system of British
political institutions. However, I found the study of ‘How
the Labour party works’ very fascinating. With the help
of the party’s Commonwealth section under John Hatch, I
attended some of their summer and week-end schools. I also
82

VISIT

TO

THE

UNITED

KINGDOM

visited a number of local parties to see the practical side of
things.
I was not able to enjoy my stay in Britain as much as I
should have done, because I always carried with me the
burden of the struggle going on at home. The people whom
I met in England who were interested in Africa were very
kind and polite and sympathetic, but like my European
liberal friends in Rhodesia, they were political babes in the
wood. They would never really believe what I said about
the oppression of my people in the rural areas. While they
were dismissing me as a gentle extremist, I was getting
letters from our organizers in the Northern and Eastern
Provinces which deeply wounded me. They told of con¬
tinuing injustice, and of all kinds of oppression.
When I am asked by Europeans how the situation got out
of hand in 1961,1 try to explain something of the long history
of oppression injEe Northern Province, but I can see they
often do not believe that I am speaking the truth. I was so
worried in August 1957 by what was happening that I wrote
and asked Mr Lennox-Boyd, Secretary of State for the
Colonies, for an interview. I was told that I might see Lord
Perth, and we did in fact meet. But I found him quite unsym¬
pathetic. He began to lecture me about the need for patience,
and I am afraid we parted company not on the best of terms,
and having achieved nothing.
During all my time in Britain, Titus Mukopo, the Congress
Acting Secretary, kept me well informed of what was hap¬
pening at home. He told me of the formation of the Constitu¬
tion party, a party composed of sincere and well-meaning
Europeans who, apart from the veteran politician, Dr Scott,
were just playing at the political game. It was in this party
that Colin Morris and Merfyn Temple first began to spread
83

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

their wings. They have flown a long way since those days.
The Constitution party never, of course, came within a
thousand miles of challenging the African National Con¬
gress, and it began to break up at its first congress in February
1958, only four months after its formation, when it decided
not to oppose Federation.
I wrote and told Titus that the time for an opposition party
had not yet come. ‘Once we have the vote, then one does not
care how many blinking parties are formed. Some of us will
have done our duty, and hope to settle down to peaceful
farming. But until then, we must guard very jealously what
has been achieved in the way of national unity.’
While I was in England, I was granted a scholarship to
study at New Delhi University, and was greatly looking
forward to taking this up, but the situation in Congress had
become critical. It was reported that the constitution was to
be changed to give more power to the president, and that the
‘non-violence’ clause might be revised.
In response to a telegram from Mr Nkumbula, I flew
home arriving just as the Annual Congress was meeting in
Lusaka. Unfortunately, the press attempted to build me up
as a rival to Mr Nkumbula and this aroused suspicions which
I had the greatest difficulty in allaying. I was determined
at that time that Congress must present a united front to
the world in its fight against oppression.
At the beginning of Febr-uary-K)58^-for the first time since
Congress’s formation ten years previously, the Governor of
Northern Rhodesia, Sir Arthur Benson, agreed to meet our
representatives to discuss the proposed new Constitution for
the Territory. We prepared our proposals, ancTm the docu¬
ment presented by Mr Nkumbula and myself we emphasized
the need for drastic change:

I

84

VISIT

TO

THE

UNITED

KINGDOM

Congress has, for a period of seven years now, put
forward proposals for Government consideration and such
proposals have found their way to the waste paper baskets.
Indeed, as a result of this, an attitude of resentment and
frustration among African leaders and their followers has
been created. The thing is, we must repeat it, to work out
a scheme which will provide an antidote for the prevailing
racial bitterness and hatred.
The crux of the matter lay in our franchise proposals and
in the warning with which we ended:
The franchise proposals shall be based on the acceptance
of universal adult franchise of one man one vote. We have
made ourselves abundantly clear in the previous para¬
graphs that there shall be no need for a qualitative franchise
apart from age and sanity since reserved seats for the
minority groups shall be created which will remove the
danger of the minority groups being swamped by Africans.
This is Congress’s proposal, and Congress’s proposal is the
proposal of the Africans of the Protectorate of Northern
Rhodesia.
Furthermore, we wish to give this .warning to the
authorities that if it is the desire of the British Government
in the United Kingdom and the European settlers in
Central Africa to build a healthy plural society in this part
of the world, this is the time to do ftTProposals similar to
the Federal franchise and the attempts which are being
made to thwart a healthy political advancement of the
Africans by technicalities of a qualified franchise consti¬
tute a serious threat to such a society. A qualified franchise
now being proposed will leave hundreds of thousands of
Africans without a vote. Naturally, these will organize
propaganda campaigns against the privileged few which
will create an atmosphere of unrest in the Protectorate -

85

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

an atmosphere which is bound to embarrass the Govern¬
ment of the day and plant fear in the minds of the minori¬
ties. In such a situation, it is idle and absolutely mischievous
to talk about building a healthy and sound multi-racial
society.
No wonder the country was in turmoil. ‘Paramountcy of
native interest’ was the political guide line of the British
Protectorate up to 1949. This was interpreted to mean
*. . . if and when the interests of the indigenous people con¬
flict with those of immigrant races, those of the former shall
prevail’ (Devonshire Declaration, 1923). This has always
been too much of a stumbling block for settlers whose un¬
yielding ambition has been amalgamation of the two
Rhodesias to which Africans on the other hand are vehem¬
ently opposed. In 1948, this policy was replaced by the socalled ‘Partnership’ without any respect for African opinion.
Later, we were told it was the foundation stone of the new
Federal State of Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia and
Nyasaland.
Lord Malvern, Welensky’s co-architect of the Federation
had, just like his friend, never hidden his contempt for
Africans. As the Federation’s first prime minister, he spoke
of this partnership thus, ‘. . . it is the same as exists between
rider and horse.’ The settler is the rider and the African is
the horse. In March of 1958, he was to tell the House of
Lords, ‘Africans are all liars until they are very much
advanced.’ (Northern Neu/s, 26 March 1958.)
It was to these prophets of apartheid posing as believers
in partnership that the British Government sold us when
they imposed Federation in 1953. It was small wonder, there¬
fore, that we found twentieth-century democracy in Northern
Rhodesia on all fours with the undeveloped democracy of
86

VISIT

TO

THE

UNITED

KINGDOM

Ancient Greece which was enjoyed by free men and war¬
riors while barring peasants, slaves and foreigners. When
people such as these are at the helm, they make high-sound¬
ing declarations that hoodwink the world into believing they
are liberals and yet they work constitutions that, in effect,
place all political power in their own hands.
I must confess that as Mr Nkumbula and I were walking
together up the steps of Government House - it was the first
time I had ever crossed its portals - I thought our proposals
were so moderate that the Government would find it diffi¬
cult to dismiss them. It did not take me long to discover how
wrong I was. The British lion, aged and toothless as it now
is, was not a beast to be approached moderately unless you
meant to sell your people to it. I remember Governor Benson
asking me, ‘Mr Kaunda, don’t you think Europeans would
paralyse Government if we accepted your proposals?’ In
reply I said, ‘Are you implying, Your Excellency, that for our
demands to be met we have got to be in a position to paralyse
Government?’ My question was never answered.
When the Government’s proposals were announced, we
were deeply shocked. Mr Nkumbula publicly burnt the
White Paper in which they were contained. The franchise
provided nothing more than the existing Federal franchise,
plus some even more reactionary measures. Of the eight
African seats, six were to be elected on the special (lower)
roll and were in the rural areas. Any candidate contesting
these rural seats had to get two-thirds of the Chiefs in his
constituency to sign the certificate approving his candidature.
Further, each of these Chiefs had to approve of the candida¬
ture in the presence of a representative of the Crown duly
appointed by the Governor. We all knew that the Chiefs
were in the pocket of the Administration.

87

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

One of the greatest weaknesses of this constitution was
that, in practice, it was not possible for an African to con¬
test and win any of the fourteen European seats because only
a handful of Africans had qualified for the ‘ordinary voters
roll’ while on the other hand European parties found
stooges among Africans to stand on their party tickets.
When the election was held in two of the special seats, the
candidates had not been able to get the necessary certificates
from the Chiefs. Two Africans got in on Welensky’s Federal
party ticket with votes from Europeans. Sir John Moffat’s
Central African party obtained two seats, the Congress one,
and there was one independent African from Barotseland.
Once more, we were told that our fears were groundless
when, in fact, political chicanery had been the order of the
day. It was not long before Welensky was asking that the
Federation should be declared a Republic.

I Split With Harry Nkumbula

I The African National Congress has always stated its belief
in non-violence and, as the years went by, I became more
and more convinced that the only way is to win your enemies
to your way of thinking and not to defeat them by violence.
88

r

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

In a letter to James Johnson of the Labour party written on
30 July 1957, I said:
‘I have been in the field now for just over six years. The
rate at which my people are becoming politically awake is
frightening, and already we are seeing a situation arising
whereby our present Congress Executive could be replaced
by a more radical one, which might think our present
methods of non-violence, a not fast enough method of re¬
dressing our grievances. I know now, James, that it is not
the leaders that have been responsible for violent activities
in colonial countries. I have never in the past thought of any
African calling the present Executive of the African National
Congress a compromising and dangerously moderate
Council, but this is already happening and all I am asking
the British Government is to help us to settle these matters
peacefully by telling them the danger of growing African
opposition to these in democratic set-ups. I would be the last
person to advocate violence because apart from the fact that
it does not pay, we have only our people to get killed. What
is the point in having the people one struggles for killed?
Who is going to profit by those rights once they are achieved
with half the population gone? In spite of the truth in my
statement, I would be doing a disservice if I did not tell the
British public what dangers lie ahead. I repeat what I have
said for the sake of emphasis. We have no intention of
running mau mau in our country but there are those dangers.
I have pointed out those facts which I think it important
for the British Government to know.’
During the early part of 1958, I suffered a good deal from
illness and the doctors could not seem to get to the bottom
of it. I had one terrible journey from the Eastern Province
when my lungs became full of dust. At that time, I was very
89

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

grateful for all the help I received from the Salvation Army
doctor at Chikankata, Dr S. G. Gauntlett. Not only did he
do much in helping my recovery to good health but on his
busy rounds of the wards, he would stop at my bedside for
long and interesting discussions. I am glad to count him
still among my friends.
During this time, my interest in ‘non-violence’ policies
was quickened. In my Congress Circular of 31 January 1958,
I wrote:
It is a good coincidence that we should be writing on
this very important subject at the time when not only India
but the entire world is remembering the Father of India
and the man who put the powerful weapon of ‘non¬
violence’ into practice. With it, he defied one of the then
most powerful imperial and world powers - the British
Empire. For years, he brought suffering upon his own
body and ended up a victim of a dirty tool of imperialism.
We might add this that it was perhaps fitting that he
should end up like that ... a more noble end could not
be found.
For the last seven years, our national leader and President
has stressed the need for being non-violent in our struggle.
This has worked out wonderfully well. Africans have
behaved remarkably well even in the face of provocation.
But let us say there is a limit to everything. Last year’s
annual conference of the African National Congress saw
leaders hard put to defending this principle. Most dele¬
gates were in favour of removing the clause that deals with
this from our constitution. Only the trust and confidence
the rank and file have placed in their leaders saved the
clause. What does this mean ? Some people will argue that
if violence broke out in Northern Rhodesia it is only the
Africans who would suffer. Nobody knows this better
90

With Lewis Changufu touring in the Northern Province after the ‘troubles’

UNO 1962 - Shaking hands with Mr Chandra S. Jha, Chairman of the
General Assembly’s Special Committee of 17

‘Bingo!’, a cartoon by Vicky published
in the Evening Standard

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

than Congress leaders. We .are aware that violence would
invite South African troops, British troops, American
troops too might come in if, for instance, what has been
happening in Algeria and Cyprus happens here. Congress
leaders realize, therefore, that they have a moral duty to
keep their people away from imperial bullets.
We put in this article in an effort to try and persuade
Government to stop what it is doing now. ... We have
evidence to show how provocative Government or its
agents have been. The police mobile unit’s activities in the
Northern and Luapula Provinces leaves much to be desired
of any police force in a democratic country. Boma mes¬
sengers have done untold harm to relations between
Africans and Government; have they behaved so badly
without instructions from their white superiors? In a most
recent case, a District Commissioner actually went down
to a Congress committee meeting and ordered the police
mobile unit to beat up Congress men, women and children
who were very orderly. What is Government up to ? Shall
we conclude that the police and military forces that are
being built are there to turn Northern Rhodesia into a
police state as far as Africans are concerned ?
We implore all our officers everywhere to stress more
and more to all our people to remain non-violent. We
must deny Government a chance for mowing our people
down with machine-guns. It has happened before on the
Copperbelt and it can happen on a larger scale if we give
them a chance. This does not mean that you should co¬
operate with what is evil, far from it. Refuse to have any¬
thing to do with anything that is unworthy of man.
In May 1958, I was invited by the Indian Council for
Cultural Relations to visit India. I had been disappointed that
I had been unable to go to New Delhi so I welcomed this
opportunity of visiting Gandhi’s homeland to meet many
D

91

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

of those who had taken part in those non-violent demonstra¬
tions which had helped to win India her independence. It
was a wonderful experience for which I shall always be
grateful but it was only an interlude in our own long
struggle, so has little place here.
I now turn to a less happy theme. Anyone who had known
my relations with Mr Nkumbula during the years we worked
together, first as District Secretary for Chinsali (1951-52), then
as his Provincial Organizing Secretary for the Northern
Province (1952-53) and finally as his Secretary-General (195358), would be justified in expressing surprise at what appeared
to be a sudden parting. The parting was sad but inevitable
at the time it took place.
We all knew and appreciated how much Mr Nkumbula
had done ever since he took over from Mr Mbikusita. But
I take the view that it would have been national suicide
politically to have allowed Mr Nkumbula to continue to
guide the nation in the way he was doing. Some of our critics
are quick to point out to us that we should have removed
him from the Presidency instead of ourselves breaking away.
I hope those will be wiser when they have realized what was
happening inside Congress at that time. I will here point
out our reasons for breaking away, without harming my old
friend’s reputation in any way.
For all the time we were together, the A.N.C. constitution
provided that the top officials of the Congress, namely,
President, Secretary, Treasurer and their deputies shall all
be elected after three years in office at an appropriate con¬
ference. But when Mr Nkumbula realized that he had made
himself unpopular, he started planning to change the Con¬
gress constitution so that its President could be elected on the
same pattern as that of the United States of America by set92

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

ting up polling booths at every branch. This, he thought,
would make him some sort of life President of Congress as
he would depend on his past popularity in so far as branch
members were concerned. All of us at the top with him
refused to accept such an unnecessarily costly affair which,
above all, would lead us to nepotism and despotism within
Congress, the very evils we are fighting against outside.
Mr Nkumbula began to brand anyone who opposed any¬
thing he wanted as either a Communist or a sell-out. No
matter how wise one may be, one is bound to make mistakes,
and if in any party or any group of people members fear to
criticize their leader constructively for fear of being branded
either Communists or sell-outs, then it all becomes a one-man
show and you are right on the verge of dictatorship. This is
where we were in Congress at that time.
At the April 1957 meeting of the National Executive
Council, we agreed to send a delegation to Britain of the
top three officials (this was cut to two due to lack of funds).
We also agreed to support the delegation with boycotts of
beer halls. This beer hall boycott was also to support our
demand that beer-brewing should be taken over by co-opera- r
tive societies run by Africans. At that time, all the municipal ;
councils and management boards which ran these beer halls',
had no African representation at all so that when the thou¬
sands of pounds that came from Africans were expended, the
African people had no say at all. This was the position when
Mr Nkumbula and I flew to London. Two days before we
were due to meet the Colonial Secretary, Mr Nkumbula
decided to fly back home. I tried to argue with him about
the necessity of his meeting Mr Lennox-Boyd but he replied
by asking me whether I was afraid of meeting him alone.
I told him it was not a matter of being afraid but that I was
93

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

only the humble Secretary-General. He was the President
now in Britain with an appointment already made with the
Colonial Secretary. It was important for him to hold on only
for two more days and then he could leave. But he decided
to go back home, and he did. The result was that we did
not see the Colonial Secretary and I was told to see Lord
Perth, Minister of State for the Colonies.
There was another engagement for Mr Nkumbula. He
was supposed to go to Ireland after meeting the Colonial
Secretary but he went away and it was my shameful duty to
defend my President by fabricating stories of why he had to
depart so suddenly, and I hope the people concerned will
forgive me when they read through these lines.
When Mr Nkumbula came back home he would not deal
with Mr Kapwepwe, the very man he had left in his position
but went ahead to call off the boycotts which his own
National Executive Council had called. It was a sad thing,
but it happened. The result was our provincial colleagues
suffered because those in authority in government could
point to the leader of the party denouncing his own boycotts
and they accused his subordinates of calling boycotts with¬
out his consent.
One of the most fatal mistakes that Mr Nkumbula made
was to fall into the habit of inviting Mr Harry Franklin to
our sessions of the National Executive Council whenever he
thought there was an issue that might raise serious contro¬
versies. What he did not appreciate at this point when he
was gradually feeling he was losing his popularity is the
fact that members of his Executive respected him more than
they did Harry Franklin. We simply could not treat Con¬
gress at this time of our development as if we were an African
Welfare Association with ex-D.C. ‘Bwana’ Franklin coming
94

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

to call us all sorts of names. The very last of these invitations
was related to the question of the beer-hall boycotts referred
to above. Mr Franklin had the cheek to call members of the
National Executive Council ‘barbarians’ because of these
boycotts. As could be expected, some members walked out
of this Council. What Mr Nkumbula thought he would
gain by this friendship only he can say. One thing, however,
stood clear, and that is, all progressive elements in that
National Executive Council who had faith in Mr Nkumbula |
began to lose it. Were these insults to the Council an arranged j
affair between the two Harrys or was it done on the spur of
the moment? Only they can tell us.
Even after these incidents, 1 tried to maintain faith in the
man I had always called ‘the Old Man’ as a mark of respect
until I came back from Britain on his instructions. I had cut
my course short as I was going to India but on hearing that
there was trouble in the Congress and he, my President,
wanted me back, I came back. When I arrived, Frank Barton,
an expert journalist, reproduced in the African Times an
article he had first written in the Central African Post under
the title, he goes to church every Sunday and plans twenty
years hence. The title he gave his article this time was,
kaunda, the man to watch. This caused a lot of trouble in
Mr Nkumbula’s mind. He spoke to me seriously about this
article and told me that this was not helping me at all. I told
him that I had nothing to do with the African Times’ article.
He said if that was the case, I should refute it. When I gladly
did this, his anxiety rested for a while.
During my tour of India which I took after the World
Assembly of Youth conference in Dar-es-Salaam, Mr
Nkumbula went round suspending and expelling all those
provincial officials that he believed had lost confidence in
95

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

him. He suspended the majority of officers in the Luapula,
Eastern, Northern and Western Provinces. The result was
that the only two - Northern and Central - which he did
not suspend, passed a vote of no confidence in him.
During my absence, Congress borrowed some money and
sent Mr Nkumbula to London, together with a government
official delegation which included Mr Sokota and Mr
Chileshe. To begin with, the Colonial Office refused to meet
Mr Nkumbula but the two African members of the Legisla¬
tive Council mentioned above managed to persuade
Governor Benson to allow Mr Nkumbula to meet the
Colonial Secretary. When his time came for this appoint¬
ment, he was still resting in bed at his hotel - why P Only
he can tell us. The only thing he could do was to post his
memorandum to the Colonial Office. Was this the way to
represent the African National Congress?
Those of us who have followed the trend of political events
closely know that Mr Nkumbula burnt the White Paper on
the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. He would have
nothing to do with it until he allowed Mr Francis Chembe,
a member of the Federal Parliament, to join Congress with¬
out first of all resigning from the Federal Parliament. This,
together with the time of the Federal elections when the late
Mr Lawrence Katilungu was allowed by Mr Nkumbula to
do some electioneering at a Congress conference after the
split in October 1958, are the only two times that Mr
Nkumbula has been anywhere near Federation. Even if we
excuse both as purely accidental, when it came to the terri¬
torial constitution, Mr Nkumbula’s behaviour left much to
be desired.
Even before the National Executive Council discussed this
proposed constitution, Mr Nkumbula was busy flirting with
96

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

the Constitution party. We were in fact waiting for him
to come and open an important session of the Executive when
he was going round pact-making. When he did finally arrive,
it was to try and persuade us that we could form a coalition
government by winning the eight seats for Africans and
then joining hands with the Constitution party which he said
was certain of winning eight of the European seats. We dis¬
missed this as political prostitution at best and a complete
sell-out at worst. We cross-examined our leader on various
points of the proposed constitution and he who came boast¬
ing that he had mastered it, in actual fact, left us with the
impression he had not begun to understand it. The result
was we set up a sub-committee of six members to reply to the
White Paper. The six were Reuben C. Kamanga, Solomon
Kalulu, Simon Kapwepwe, Justin Chimba, Titus B. Mukupo
and myself. The reply gave our reasons for rejecting the
Benson Constitution and is contained in Appendix III.
Shordy after our findings, Mr Nkumbula burnt in public
a copy of the White Paper on the constitution of Northern
Rhodesia and we took it for granted that he, as our leader,
had put a seal to this bogus constitution fraught with political
snares and pitfalls. As already pointed out above, he had
done something similar over the White Paper on Federation.
It was a complete surprise to some of us, therefore, to see our
leader wanting to give this very constitution a ‘fair trial’.
This was the final straw.
Not unnaturally, we began to ask ourselves a number of
questions, some of which were, Was this the man who had
inspired us at the time of fighting against Federation, the
man who had inspired us by renaming the Northern
Rhodesia African Congress, ‘The African National Con¬
gress’? Was he now asking for powers he had never found
97

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

necessary ever since he took over from Mr Mbikusita? We
went on, Is the man we have trusted now demanding some¬
thing he knows is wrong even before he has that power con¬
stitutionally ? Is he not packing the National Executive
Council with non-members, men and women who were not
even provincial officers? I wondered whether this was still
the same man, the man to whom I had given my unqualified
support and loyalty, the man I had known to be unyielding
to anything because of his love for his people and country. I
wondered why he was behaving like this. Mr Nkumbula
was a man who because of his nationalism could not even
allow anything tribalistic to be discussed in his National
Executive Council but who was now busy trying to split us
all on tribal lines. It was terrible and incredible but there
was no point in deceiving ourselves for sad as all this was, it
was happening. I began wondering whether he was becom¬
ing a second Mbikusita. The question now is, What made
Mr Nkumbula change his behaviour like that? No other
person can answer this except himself. Others can only guess.
If he won’t answer, history will. For while we can cheat and
fool one another, we cannot do the same with history. Let
us only hope that history will not judge him too harshly, for
he was sincere in his early days.
We left the African National Congress without anything.
All we had was a tide of anger against us. On 24 October,
the Zambia African Congress was born at a meetingTield at
Broken Hill to which sixty delegates had been called with
only a week’s notice. I was elected President. Mr Sipalo the
Secretary and Mr Kapwepwe the Treasurer.'MHAv-Kemkohi,
Mr W. K. Sikalumbi and Mr R. C. Kamanga were elected
as our deputies, but as soon as Mr Konkola discovered that
he had not been chosen as President, he walked out of the
98

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

meeting and Mr Paul Kalichini was elected a deputy in his
Yilace. As soon as the elections were over, we set about our
task and we really worked hard. Today when we meet and
recall our system of organization and the spirit behind it all,
we are staggered by the amount of work we managed to
get through.
Our headquarters was hut number 280 at the New
Chilenje township. We had to live there as well as use it
for our office. We drew up a scheme of work for each day
and also we kept a careful record of all work done. This
scheme of work was a sheet of paper headed, ‘Where is it?’
Each one of us had to go out every night of the week to a
location, compound or section of a township as had been
assigned to us on the list. We had just three points to deal
with. The first was to tell people why we had broken with
the African National Congress; the second was to explain
in detail why we had rejected the Benson constitution for
the territory. The third was an appeal for membership and.
subscriptions.
Every morning we met to report on the previous night’s
successes and failures and then we would draw up the new
scheme of work for the day.
Where there had been success, we knew that there was
less need for concentration, except to check on the appointed
organizers from time to time. Even if we were out of the
headquarters, there would always be someone junior to
receive reports and report back to us. Our slogans became
very popular. We invented and introduced easy slogans so
that all our followers could repeat them, for the more people
you had shouting them the better for the popularity and
membership campaign of the party. Within a few weeks, we
grew to something very considerable.
99

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

I should like to point out here that reading the Ridley
Report today I can see that those who were informing
Governor Benson about our activities at night could have
taken our seriousness in organizing our people at night as
intimidating and threatening them. This was not true. When
the Ridley Report speaks of violence being planned to take
place after we were arrested for violent speeches, I believe
all that to be some sort of excuse to suit the action taken by
Government then. It must be common sense to any unbiased
observer that the moment you remove leaders from their
followers, each one of those followers becomes a general unto
himself. There are numerous examples in the Indian struggle
for independence. Whenever leaders were arrested violence
broke out almost invariably. In fact, for all the allegations
in the press, radio and through various other media, we
never planned violence of any kind. The only charge ever
i made against me for my activities at this time was that I had
1 conspired with others to call an unauthorized meeting. This,
of course, is regarded as a felony and when it was reported
in the press that I was charged with conspiring to commit a
felony, it appeared to the casual reader that I was planning
something horrible. In a later chapter, I state that this calling
of an unauthorized meeting was done in accordance with a
procedure we had clearly laid down to give due warning to
Government if we planned in any way to break the law. I
had in actual fact raised the question with Governor Benson
by petitioning him three times for permission to hold meet¬
ings and when he refused to allow us any more meetings, I
felt it was my duty to defend freedom of speech by defying
what we all regarded as a stupid ban.
While we were busy day and night organizing our new
party, we found time to draw up our own proposals for
ioo

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

constitutional reform which we submitted to the British
government on 4 February 1959. Printed on the front of
our proposals was the text: ‘We know of no other reposi¬
tory of the ultimate powers of society but the people them¬
selves.’
In our letter to the Colonial Secretary we said, ‘Govern¬
ment is the strongest of which every man feels himself a
part’, and this, of course, was the fundamental basis of our
demand for a universal franchise. It is the possession of the
vote that makes a man or woman feel in himself that he is a
real part of the new nation.
The document we presented is too long to quote here in
full; but it is interesting to note that the proposals we made
in our Zambia days when everyone was calling us thugs
and hooligans were not very different from the constitution
given us by the British government in 1962. I quote the
relevant paragraphs under Articles 2, 3 and 4 of our pro¬
posals:
Article 2. Franchise

1 Every male or female African on or above the age of
20 years shall have the right to vote;
2 Alien Africans on or above the age of 20 years shall
have the right to vote after six months’ residence;
3 Alien Non-Africans on or above the age of 21 years
after 3 years’ residence and being an approved citizen,
shall have the right to vote.
4 Alien Non-Africans from Britain and other Western
democracies on or above the age of 21 years shall have
the vote immediately on naturalization or otherwise
after 3 years’ residence;
5 Non-Africans from South African and other imperial
101

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

possessions in Africa on or above the age of 25 years
shall have the vote immediately after naturalization
or after 5 years of residence.
Article 3. Representation
There shall be a Parliament of 59 members directly
elected by the people plus three ex-officio members Chief Secretary, Attorney-General and Financial
Secretary.
1 The 59 shall be elected thus: two elected members for
each of the following towns (eight of whom shall be
non-Africans): Livingstone, Lusaka, Broken Hill,
Ndola, Luanshya, Mufulira, Kitwe - Kalulushi Chilubuma, Chingola - Bancroft.
2 Four elected members from the four farming areas
of the Southern, Eastern, Central and Western
Provinces.
3 39 shall be elected thus: Barotseland, 5; N.W. Pro¬
vince, 4; Western Province (Rural), 3; Luapula
Province, 4; Northern Province, 7; Eastern Province,
6; Southern Province, 4; Central Province, 6; making
39 in all.
The National Council of Chiefs

There shall be a Central Council of Chiefs. All Para¬
mount Chiefs shall be ex-officio Members of the
National Council of Chiefs. All Native Authorities
shall return one.
Meetings

The National Council of Chiefs shall meet four times
a year.
Powers of the National Council of Chiefs

(a) Shall safeguard customary law, culture and tradi¬
tions.
102

I

SPLIT

WITH

HARRY

NKUMBULA

(b) Shall act as guardians and custodians of the
Nation by:
(i) Checking on legislations that affect the Nation
as in (a) above.
(ii) Checking on any other legislation.
Article 4. The Parliament

There shall be a House of representatives hereinafter
known as the ‘National Assembly’. The National
Assembly shall be presided over by a Speaker elected
by the National Assembly.
With the exception of Ministries of Defence,
Foreign Affairs, Finance and Law which shall be held
by the Governor, and three top Civil Servants, the
Cabinet shall consist of nine Ministries nominated by
the leader of the majority Party from among the
elected members in consultation with the Governor.
These shall be the Chief Minister (Home Affairs and
National Guidance) and the Ministries for Commerce
and Industry, Economic Planning and Mineral
Wealth; Agriculture and Natural Resources; Land
Development and Co-operatives; Labour; Health;
Education; Information and Broadcasting; Local
Government; Transport and Communication. The
Ministers shall owe allegiance to the British Crown.
There shall be permanent Under Secretaries to all the
Ministries appointed at the discretion of the respon¬
sible Ministers. The Under Secretaries shall not sit in
the National Assembly.

103

i4

Arrest and Detention

The day had been unsually hot for March and the out-of¬
season drought made the little ones who lay uncomfortably
sprawled on their communal mats rather tired. In a tworoomed house, number 257, New Chilenje township, ten
of us lived. There were two nieces and a nephew besides my
wife and our five sons. Our nephew and our firstborn shared
our small kitchen. There they lay, looking more like pieces of
firewood than human beings. The youngest two shared our
tiny bedroom with us and the rest occupied the other room.
It was everything - bedroom, living-room, dining-room - and
before we secured a New Chilenje two-roomed house number
280, this room was also used as the Zambia office. In fact, it
was here that the resolution to form the Zambia African
National Congress was_passed. The congestion and the dis¬
comfort I knew to be too hard on my wife who was expecting
our sixth child, but she did not complain. This suffering has,
however, now been a source of great laughter between the
Kapwepwes and ourselves for, in their own moments, Mama
Salome Kapwepwe and my wife very seriously questioned
the wisdom of their husbands starting a new political party.
Had we not suffered enough when serving in the African
National Congress and was it not time we went back to a
normal life, the life we had known in pre-Congress
activities? However, this was carefully hidden from us.
104

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

On io March, one of our informants came to report that all
senior police officers from all Provinces had been meeting at
their territorial Headquarters and he knew we were going to
be arrested, either on that day or the following. We, there¬
fore, began to prepare ourselves by combing our offices and
homes clean in so far as our valued papers and books were
concerned. We placed these with people we could trust and
those we knew the police could not suspect and invade. By
this time we had already sent out to Tanganyika Mr Lewis
Changufu. We did not have sufficient funds but Mr Ben
Kapufi, then a business man in Broken Hill, offered to assist
us. The original idea was that both Mr Munukayumbwa
Sipalo and Mr Reuben Chitandika Kamanga, National
Secretary and Deputy National Treasurer respectively, would
leave the Protectorate, but lack of funds prevented this.
On io March nothing unusual happened. On the nth, it
was clear that we were being shadowed in a very unusual
way and we knew the reason for it. Late that evening about
five of us got together. It is now difficult to say why we met.
Perhaps our souls and bodies needed coming together. How¬
ever, we were together for some good hours until someone
joked it would be better that one should be arrested in the
presence of his own family, and that sent us all to our re¬
spective homes. All of us had heavy hearts even though each
tried hard not to display it. By the time I got home all but my
wife were fast asleep. I could not find our lock so I used a
pair of scissors in place of a lock.
I must have been asleep for an hour when I opened my eyes
and noticed that a motor vehicle was approaching our home
and had floodlit our bedroom. My watch read i a.m. I began
to dress and told my wife to do likewise. Before we could
go through there was a loud knock at our cattle-kraal-type

I05

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

■t

door. In a very firm voice I said, ‘Just a moment, please.’
This was followed up by a big push and the pair of scissors
gave way and, in the twinkling of an eye, there was a police¬
man in uniform right in our bedroom.
He immediately ordered me to put my signature to a piece
of paper which he would neither show nor read to me.
Normally, I would have refused to sign something that I
knew nothing about, but this time I looked at my wife and
then my two boys with their startled faces and without the
slightest resistance I signed a document not knowing what it
was. Up to now, I cannot explain my action. It was not as
though I was taken by surprise. I knew they were coming
and my mind was steady in so far as I can remember ... so
it could not be a surprise. However, he ordered that I should
pack up one suitcase while his two colleagues filled their
Land-Rover with my books and papers. The younger of our
two nieces sat up just as I was getting out and shouted, ‘Zaza-za.’ And just as suddenly as she had started up she fell
back and slept. The whole small Land-Rover was full of my
books and papers; so much so that I perched on my own
otherwise valuable property with my left hand handcuffed to
an African plain-clothes man and my right to that of a
white assistant inspector in uniform. My wife, who had
followed us outside, was told by the policeman, who obviously
was leading the operation, to report at the D.C.’s office for
ration money. With this, my long journey to some unknown
destination started. I was rushed to the Woodlands police
station. I discovered later that the man in charge did not
trust the signature I had given him and so I had to thumb¬
print his document. From this police station, we rushed at a
terrific speed past Government House, the Secretariat, the
High Court and on to King George Avenue which joined

io 6

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

Cairo Road. Six miles from Lusaka on the Great North Road
towards Broken Hill, we swerved into a very large gravel
pit W'here some contractor had dug out ballast for the road.
I thought the whole police force was centred there for the
night. There must have been some forty police vehicles
around. The man in charge of our unwelcome expedition
reported to his superiors about his big catch and I was
immediately conscious of scores of hungry and fixed glances.
My suitcase was thrown to the ground and someone opened
it and began to make a thorough search of all my clothes and
then threw them down carelessly. After this I was pushed
into a near-by Black Maria where I found two of my col¬
leagues, Simon Kapwepwe and old John Mumbi. A few
minutes later we were joined by Chipowe who was Lusaka
Chairman.
The fact that we did not know where we were going made
us very uncomfortable. We tried to speak to the two police
officers who were in charge at this time but they would not
talk, so we decided to be unruly and started singing. They
did not like it, so they threatened to separate us if we con¬
tinued. We thought that would be terrible in the circum¬
stances so we stopped, but this gave me an opportunity to talk
and rather unconcernedly I said, ‘I am very glad that I am
going to see my mother at last.’ One of the two men fell
into our trap. Laughing very loudly and obviously enjoying
himself he said, ‘You have a hope. You are going right in
the opposite direction.’ Well this wasn’t much but at least we
knew we were not going home. Incidentally, all of us five
were ex-Chinsali.
It must have been between 3 and 4 a.m. when all officers
and their men left except for a car, a Land-Rover and our
Black Maria. At 4 o’clock we started moving. We went round
107

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

and round Lusaka for about an hour and then we shot straight
for the airport where we found a full force of security men.
I was called out first and two hefty police officers escorted
me to a waiting 44-seater plane, the engines of which were
already running and ready for immediate take-off. My hands
were twisted as they took me to the aeroplane. At a quarter
past five we took off for our unknown destination. Our next
port was Ndola. As we descended, we could see a big police
truck surrounded by Land-Rovers and we knew we were
stopping to pick up some more ‘trouble-makers’. Sure
enough we were joined by Hyden Dingiswayo Banda,
Nephas Tembo, J. K. Mulenga, R. Kapangala, Joseph L.
Mulenga and Ralph Kombe from Broken Hill. I remember
as we were airborne again we were offered some corned beef
and biscuits. Someone told the captain (a police officer) that
I did not take meat but there was nothing the poor man could
do. After some time, I went along to the lavatory. An
African constable followed me. I protested vigorously to the
captain for this intrusion into my privacy, but our good
captain could only regret and told us those were his orders
so I decided to withdraw. After some two hours we landed
at Balovale landing ground. I spent some few hours there
and was then sent on the last lap of my long journey to my
unknown destination. At six p.m., I was handed over to
the D.C., Kabompo. There Frank Chitambala joined me
and thirty minutes later, we arrived at our new ‘home’.
In Blac\ Government?, which I wrote with the Rev. Colin
Morris, I said, ‘We are engaged in a struggle against any
form of imperialism and colonialism not because it has as its
agents white men but because it has many more wrong sides
than good ones.’ Here is an illustration of what I mean. After
our first breakfast at Kabompo, we decided to take a stroll.
108

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

To our surprise villagers ran away from us as we approached
them. Men stood near trees ready to climb up should we
approach them. Mothers dashed to their houses with babies
in their arms. When this was repeated about three times, we
thought it right to find out what was happening and, on
investigation, we found out that those in authority had spread
a very wicked story about us. Villagers had been told that
these Zambia men were cannibals. They especially liked
children since these provided tender meat. Anyone who
would go to this extent of telling lies in order to maintain
his position I think calls for mental treatment, but this is
imperialism at work. In Blac\ Government? I also said, ‘It
is an arrangement that will corrupt the best of men regard¬
less of their colour, creed or religion.’ I can’t imagine these
same people who do such things in Africa doing these things
in Britain, but out here they are defending a wrong system.
However, very soon we settled down and our people around
soon came in good numbers to listen to the good tidings of
freedom. In fact, we became so effective that only a month
after we had been there we received individual orders ban¬
ning us from addressing any meeting at all.
Our movements were restricted to a limited_area so we
tried to while away Bur "time in ili> ustduTa way as we could
in the circumstances. Webegan our mornings with baths and
breakfast after which Frank and Musonda, who joined us
after two weeks, would go out to look for provisions; then
they would join me at our open-air office. Some very strange
things happened there. One very hot morning, I was wearing
a very simple form of sandal and had no shirt on, only a vest.
I had been reading very hard but at this time I stopped sud¬
denly. My thoughts began wandering. I wondered why man
could not come closer to nature and be a friend with all that
109

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

we fear today. I thought to myself if only we could be like
little children we might play around with deadly snakes like
the puff adder. At this juncture, I looked down and saw the
head of a very big snake just passing the small toe of my left
foot. I cannot explain my behaviour here but I looked on
calmly. My uninvited, unwelcome and deadly poisonous
visitor was a black mamba about five feet long. (After Mr
John Gaunt called me a black mamba, I often wondered why
this particular member of ‘my family’ did not stop to greet
me. It could be my ignorance of the Mamba language!) Some
good five minutes must have elapsed when all of a sudden I
jumped up and dashed into my bedroom. The swift snake
must have been a mile away by then.
After lunch, we would take a rest and we would go back
to our open air office again until 5 p.m. I would then take
my long evening walk while Frank and Musonda would
prepare our evening meals. It was during these walks that
another of these strange things happened. Before this time, I
used to admire much that is in nature but never before had I
come so close to nature and never before had I actually fallen
in love with nature. This is what I mean. Before this, I had
defended quite sincerely, controlled ‘Chitememe System’ and
‘Soil Conservation’ as well as game reserves. I had done this
because of my personal experience at home. Around Lubwa
we had plenty of game, trees and grass. But as our gun
population grew, game became less and less. Today hunters
have to go to Chiefs Chibale and Lundu in the Luangwa
Valley to hunt game. Trees disappeared until some method
of control was resorted to. We had to work hard to save our
soil at the Mission Station from erosion by making contour
ridges. This was my experience before Kabompo days, but
quite a new attachment to nature grasped me here. I would
no

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

walk for about a mile and then come to rest at a very high
place overlooking one of the most beautiful scenes in the
country at that time of the year. Here the silent waters of
the Kabompo River gather in one great sheet of water. On
both sides of the river are huge trees, deep green in the
rainy season. They seem to be jealous of one another and
appear to be pointing fingers of strange accusation at each
other as the wind blows them backwards and forwards. Just
as this one great sheet of water makes a sharp bend at the
grassy feet of this princely high ground of Kabompo Boma,
the silent waters burst into noisy protest as they clash with the
enduring rocks.
Here I would sit in silent meditation removed from this
world. Here I seemed to be getting nearer and nearer to
understanding the language of nature. I studied the various
shapes of trees and this gave me great pleasure. As the quiet
breeze blew from the River Kabompo the trees and the grass
around seemed to dance to a strange tune which made me
feel that I was in the midst of music which would never
come the way of my ears. However, there I sat, while minutes
ran into hours. During these periods lions, leopards, hyenas,
snakes and all animals seemed to accept one name, creatures
of God the Almighty, and seemed to agree that they should
not hurt each other. At times, Frank Chitambala would get
worried about my long absence and would come looking for
me. After this experience, I decided to get myself a camera,
hoping to photograph trees from various angles that pleased
me and to build up an album of such shapes. At this time
more than ever before I began to wrestle with the idea that
trees and all growing things must have a language of their
own but that God’s creation that passes all men’s understand¬
ing has kept this a secret, and that some day this secret will
hi

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

be revealed to man in the same way as so many have
already been revealed. I have bought my camera since
coming out of jail but the factor of time is against my
Kabompo detention days’ ambition. I still hope to fulfil
this some time.
Our influence around Kabompo was not confined to
schoolboys and villagers only. I had a habit of using a rough
sort of staff as a walking stick. Within a month almost every
Boma messenger was walking around with one. So did a
good number of schoolboys, much to the annoyance of the
officials, who started giving lectures on how not to behave.
Life was not all rosy at Kabompo. I almost lost my life at one
time. I had a serious attack of dysentery followed by a sharp
attack of malaria and then I suffered from a series of colds
and coughing attacks. In so far as my health was concerned I
did much better when I was re-arrested and sentenced to
prison. There are other sad memories of Kabompo. One day
I went to see the District Commissioner about the in¬
sufficiency of our allowances. I arrived at the offices at 8.30
a.m. At 9.30 a.m. the Hon. William Nkanza, member of the
Legislative Council for North West arrived. He waited for
forty-five minutes but the D.C. could not see him. We were
just told to wait. Mr Nkanza went back but I still continued
to wait. At 12 noon I went past the messenger posted near
the D.C.’s door to stop anyone from going in. My patience
was completely exhausted. I knocked at the door very angrily
and entered without his asking me in. He shouted at me to
get out but I refused and instead demanded to be told why
he had kept me waiting for three and a half hours. He
replied that he was drafting something for me to sign. I
shouted back saying surely it would have been good manners
to let me know and then I would not have wasted my time.
112

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

How would he have liked it if someone else had treated him
as he had treated me P
At this juncture, he lost his temper and called me names.
Silently I went straight for him. He left his chair and we
went round and round his table as he called for his head
messenger. The head messenger came in and stood between
us as we looked at each other like fighting cocks. Our newly
found peace-maker was an old man for whom I had great
respect and, when he pleaded with me not to do anything,
I looked at my friend and saying, ‘I respect the head mes¬
senger more than I do you’, I left. An hour later, the D.C.
came to my open-air office to make us sign certain docu¬
ments. They were the orders - already referred to above banning all three of us from addressing any meetings fori]
three months.
One other thing I think I should refer to. Before being
taken to Kabompo as a detainee, I had not visited the North
Western Province at all. Because of this my knowledge of
this Province as well as Barotseland was only second-hand.
One of the things that struck me immediately as a universal
problem for our country was drunkenness. My worry about
this problem can be understood by reading part of a letter to
Mr Solomon Kalulu who had just resigned from the African
National Congress leadership. I wrote to him at this time:
Brother Kalulu, my short stay here has been an eyeopener. I now agree with those who say in the worst of
things there is always a degree of good. As you know for
good or bad I have spent much of my time in the A.N.C.
offices ever since I took over the secretaryship in 1953. This
has made me lose sight of the rural areas. I have gone
round quickly with an eye more on the politics of the day
and have rushed to the Headquarters with little under-

IJ3

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

standing of the vastness of the problem. In the way we are
going about it today, we will be founding our National
House on sand and as Our Lord has taught, this house so
built will not stand the tempests that are part and parcel of
what we lightly call life. In this respect, I think my being
arrested and rusticated has been a blessing in disguise. I
have not only discovered my mistake (or rather Himalayan
Error) but have in the process just started re-discovering
myself and my people. I have always believed that our
moral decay was rampant only in certain areas and not
in rural areas. In this, I have been mistaken greatly. I
don’t know whether you share my feelings on this point.
The Western way of life has been so powerful that our
own social, cultural and political set-up has been raped
by the powerful and greedy Western civilization. To
crown it all, the economic disequilibrium is such that
our people, having lost their social and cultural back¬
ground, are now hovering around to catch up with the
outwardly superior social and cultural levels of the West.
This needs a certain standard of economic strength which
is absent. The result is the desire to have what they cannot
have or what a foreign rule has deprived them of; and so
what? Of course, moral destruction.
Now do we who style ourselves leaders of African
opinion make serious surveys of this? Do we sincerely
work for self-government now ? If so, who do we hope to
lead to our cherished land of Canaan? A nation half¬
drunk, half-thinking, half-corrupted, possessing only so
many other halves of what makes life what it should
be? In short, do we hope to make a nation out of an
utterly demoralized people? Is it possible? Sometimes I
fear this subject haunts me so much that I may suffer from
an obsession. This is difficult to say for one on his own,
so I trust you will be good as ever you have been to me and
tell me plainly if, from the bottom of your heart, you think
”4

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

I am over-anxious about this. In other words, if you think
things are not as bad as I see them please say so and supply
arguments to show the contrary is the case.
Ever since I came here, I have seen young men of my
age and, what is worse, some who are much younger, give
no thought whatsoever. If they have their pay-packet and
can get bottles of Kachasu on Saturdays and Sundays, the
only concerns of life are met. What goes on here during
week-ends presents as pathetic a sight as you see in Lusaka.
Honestly, how can we go on like this? The mix-ups in
these drinking places is such that people end up in the
Chiefs’ Courts on Mondays. There is no time for serious
thinking and planning. Amidst all this mess, the Northern
Rhodesia government is bringing a bottle store here either
next month or so. This reminds me of what one of the
top men in the African Affairs Committee said once when
someone was arguing against beer sales increase. He said,
‘How are we going to run our local government African
affairs without this?’ Hollow! Honestly, if a government
cannot be run without demoralizing so badly its own
people, then that government is no good and it must give
way to people who can.
One does not object to people drinking. It is a habit that
has grown with us, I mean in us the entire mankind. But
I suspect it is being used to destroy us. There are so many
things that are bad in our way of life but I believe there
are also many that are good. Among those that are good is
the way our forefathers used to take their alcoholic stuffs.
It was not only dignified but was also a place at which the
old imparted wisdom to the young. In fact, it is still the
way all self-respecting people under all shades of colour
take their drinks even today. Why should it be different
for us, the African masses? Please discuss this subject with
Brother Christopher and any others whom you trust and
let me know what your opinion is. I don’t need to say ‘your

n5

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

candid’ opinion because I trust you cannot tell anyone
what you don’t believe to be right. The history of the
working class in Britain greatly subscribes to my fears.
On hearing from you, I shall introduce another subject
and maybe in this way we could find a way out.
When we were banned, arrested and banished to various
parts of the country, Governor Benson made a terrible attack
on us that was widely circulated through the press and also,
of course, broadcast several times. I heard then that a com¬
mission had been set up to look into the banning of Zambia
and so I decided to prepare a statement to be presented to
this Commission. It was to be a sworn statement. This was
not presented to the Ridley Commission because my legal
advisers counselled against it. The following is part of my
statement:
Sworn memorandum drawn up by Kenneth David
Kaunda, thirty-five-year-old ex-leader and President of the
Zambia African National Congress, Northern Rhodesia,
for the Commission appointed to probe into the banning
of the said Zambia African National Congress, Northern
Rhodesia.

To begin with, I wish the Commissioner to know that I
am disadvantageously placed when drawing up this
memorandum in that documents from which I could have
drawn specific references to support my case are all in the
custody of the Northern Rhodesia police, and that all
persons that I could have asked to come forward as wit¬
nesses are similarly placed. In the circumstances, I can
do no better than base my memorandum on the Governor’s
statement as reported in the Central African Post of 13
March 1959.
The Governor has taken the drastic step of not only
116

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

banning a four-month-old popular African political
organization but has also arrested and rusticated all its
leaders without trial in courts of law. It is astounding;
that he has given such a weak case to explain why he took
this step. I will here give evidence to show the Commission
that there was either colossal ignorance of the truth on
certain important matters upon which he bases his action
as explicitly shown in the statement or there was colossal
bias. In the circumstances, it seems more charitable to
accept the former view.
i. The Governor, with apparent emphasis on certainty
says, ‘I will describe briefly the regulations I have made
for you after I have told you with utmost frankness the
full reasons that have led me to take this action.’
After this, he goes on to speak about the Accra Con¬
ference; he describes how Mr Nkumbula (President of the
only African political party that has not been banned in
Central Africa) ‘disagreed with certain things and left
before the Conference had ended’. The poor man does not
know that if Mr Nkumbula disagreed with certain things
then he did so in deep silence that could only mean consent.
Let Mr Nkumbula be called to prove that he dis¬
agreed with certain things and explicitly said so. To say
that Mr Nkumbula left the Conference before it ended
is as true as it could be to say Governor Benson has been
the doctor in charge of the African Hospital in Lusaka
for the last five years. Mr Nkumbula left Accra on
19 December 1958, on the same Pan American plane as
did Mr Tom Mboya, the Chairman of the Conference, Dr
Hastings K. Banda of Nyasaland and other delegates. I
was at the airport to see them off. I remember I spoke to
him about the ‘Charter of Unity’ that we signed in Accra
advising him not to do anything about it until my arrival
home. I remained behind because I accepted an invitation
extended to all delegates from the Extra-mural Depart-

”7

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

ment of the University College of Ghana to attend a io-day
New Year School. Before going to the College I visited
the Republic of Togoland for three days to see for myself
what was happening there.
2. The next thing the Governor dwells upon to support
his banning of Zambia is that the Accra Conference varied
our usual pledge of non-violence to one of violence. This
is not true because non-violence was the most emphasized
word right through the Conference. Russell Howe writing
for the Sunday Times had this to say:
‘The All-African People’s Conference which begins here
on Monday is meant to produce a strategy for independ¬
ence for each of the still colonized areas of Africa accord¬
ing to delegates from French and British West Africa.
Apart from non-violent campaigns (the italics are mine)
for independence the Conference will discuss the form¬
ing of economic and political Federations of the ‘United
States of West Africa’ type; proposed revision of certain
African frontiers, most of which were arbitrarily fixed
at the Berlin Conference in 1884 and often present cer¬
tain ethnic anomalies; the future position of chieftaincy,
traditional religion and “tribal” organizations; the
status of African women and other social questions.’
This, in actual fact, is the line that was followed at the
Conference. The Governor’s source of information here
again is as faulty as in 1 above.
3. The Governor goes on to say inter alia: ‘It is the
Zambia leaders who have, since the turn of the year, been
threatening violence to other Africans, been declaring that
Africa is for Africans alone, been organizing disobedience
to just laws, and have in particular Been making prepara¬
tions to prevent by violence and intimidation any African
voter from casting his vote at the elections on 20 March.
This they have done openly in public. But worse, far
worse, is what they have done privately in the villages and

1x8

ARREST

AND

DETENTION

in the towns at night. There they had instituted a reign
of terror. They have placed men in fear of their lives.
They have threatened death and mutilation to their wives
and children. They have invoked witchcraft and unmen¬
tionable cursings in order to deter Africans from voting.
And because all these things take place in private and at
night with no witnesses, they are desperately difficult to
deal with in law.’
From here, this Excellency goes on to compare us with
Chicago racketeers. It is amazing that the highest repre¬
sentative of the Queen in the land will make such serious
charges against us and when he is required to prove his
allegations, he ends up by saying ‘. . . they take place at
night and in private with no witnesses, they are desperately
difficult to deal with in law’. I wish here Mr Commissioner
to record my deep regret that this particular Excellency
will not be here to prove his allegations.
I then went on to record the activities of the Zambia't(
African National Congress which aimed at majority rule;
‘in the same way as the English rule England, the French
rule France, Japanese rule Japan, Indians rule India, Africans
must rule Africa’.' I emphasized how unfair it was for the
Governor who had all the opportunities of radio and press at
his disposal to use the provincial administration, the police
and many others to spread his propaganda and after failing
to justify his action in banning and prosecuting us to say
‘they are desperately difficult to deal with in law’. But per¬
haps this paragraph best sums up my argument:
Now the crowning reason why Sir Arthur acted as he
did was his own fear of Zambia. Zambia grew almost .
overnight. Its influence was considerable. Its campaign i
against the Benson constitution was so intense and effective
119

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

that Sir Arthur feared we were going to succeed in per¬
suading our people to stay away from polling stations on
20 March. Our success would have resulted in a consti¬
tutional crisis. Since this was his own constitution, he was
naturally worried and had to do all in his power to make
the constitution work. He did something and this was to
ban Zambia, arrest and rusticate all its leaders.
I wish to state here categorically that we shall untiringly
attack systems that for reasons of race alone deny about
three million Africans the full enjoyment of democratic
rights in this country. But I shall always pray that no bitter¬
ness shall come into the picture and that we freedom
fighters shall be for ever colour-blind. We make no apolo¬
gies for being in the forefront in the struggle for national
independence and self-determination, freedom is our
birthright and we simply are determined to achieve it.
With this I beg to submit, sir, that the action taken by
His Excellency, the Governor, Sir Arthur T. Benson, was
uncalled for, unjust and wrong; and that not only should
the ban on Zambia be lifted immediately but that an
apology be made to us on behalf of the Governor for his
statement which is libellous.
Finally, I wish to make this appeal to you that you
recommend the setting up of a Constitution Commission
to enquire into the establishment of a democratic consti¬
tution based on one man one vote as this is the only w7ay
to end political strife in this our mother land.

120

*5

Prison

I remember one day telling Frank Chitambala that he should
go through all his files to find out whether there was anything
objecdonable that the police might use against him. I don’t
now remember whether he took my advice seriously but the
following morning I received for the first time a nice letter
from the D.C. inviting me to go and have a chat with him.
Both Frank and Musonda accompanied me. On arrival at
the Boma office, I was rearrested and taken back to my
Kabompo home for a thorough search. Unfortunately, I had
not taken any breakfast that morning. We drove from
Kabompo to Balovale only to learn that our friends and col¬
leagues had also been searched. I took it for granted the
search had been country-wide, and this was, in fact, the
case. At Balovale, the kind wife of the C.I.D. officer offered
me some orange juice and that was the only food I took till
very late in the night.
I urged my temporary custodians to be quick so I could
get to Lusaka in time to contact my lawyers. They told me
both of them were away. I learnt later this was not true.
The truth is that they had orders to land at Lusaka airport
at 7 p.m. On arrival, someone else drove me to the Central
Prison, Lusaka. I went back to my old familiar cell where
in 1955 I had lived with Mr Nkumbula. This time the beds
had not been removed; in fact, there were bed sheets, two
121

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

pillows and two pairs of pyjamas. I had some bread, marga¬
rine and cheese that night. The following morning my
lawyer came and we sat together to prepare my case. We
did not refuse the charge and so I prepared to give a
long statement which the presiding magistrate ruled out
as a political speech before I could finish reading it. My
lawyer gave the Crown witnesses a very hard time and,
finally, I was given nine months on the first count which was
‘conspiring to effect an unlawful purpose’ and I got three
months on the second count which was ‘authorizing to be
held an unlawful meeting’; the sentences to run concur¬
rently. On one occasion during my trial the police officer
who was taking me to the court became annoyed with me
for waving back to our people who waved when they saw
me. He said to me, ‘Why do you keep waving all the time as
if you were Elizabeth the Queen Mother? If this continues,
I will see to it that you come to court in the Black Maria do you understand?’ Of course I understood, but I did not
say so. I continued to wave but this time very carefully. The
idea of travelling by a Black Maria was not a very pleasant
prospect. Munukayumbwa Sipalo who had been rusticated
at Fcira was also in prison widi me but he was not living
with me at the European, Asian and Euro-African quarters.
He was kept at what is called ‘The Confinement’, obviously
to keep us apart.
My morning began at 6 a.m. At this time, the arrival of
the superintendent would be heralded by deafening noises
caused by the opening of the gigantic locks of the two doors
south of my own. Mine would then be opened. Almost with¬
out exception, the African warder would quietly greet me
respectfully and then retreat to the door. As soon as he was
certain the European officer would hear him, he would raise
122

With the Tanganyika representative Mr Ngaiza, Sir Stewart GoreBrowne and Mr Desai. On the left is Mr Wina
Our delegation at the United Nations Special Committee, April 19I
l. to r., Mr T. L. Desai, Sir Stewart Gore-Browne. self, and Mr A. N.
Wina

PRISON

his voice and make some queer sound with his incredibly big
bunch of keys by rubbing it against the door and then
shout in a terribly harsh voice, Vu\a, vu\a, vu\a, meaning,
‘Wake up, wake up, wake up’. The European officer would
then come in and take a quick look round my room and then
ask, ‘Everything all right?’ and I would reply, ‘All right
thank you, Officer.’ As cook for our European, Asian and
Euro-African Section, I would then dash to ‘warm up the
stove’ as we used to say. Our breakfast varied according to
tastes. I would prepare something like this: tea or coffee,
mealie meal and porridge, and then I would start cleaning
pots, pans and plates. As everybody else would be parading
to go out to work, I would then start on polishing floors.
The superintendent usually came at about 9 a.m. for his
round-up. By the time he came to my domain, it would be
about 10 o’clock. He, like all of his kind, had a very sharp
eye for anything dirty. I usually kept everything clean and
then he would make suggestions as to what should be done.
Such were in fact orders. If he was satisfied, he would say,
‘Yes, keep it clean, Kaunda’ in a heavy, slow voice in which
one discerned satisfaction mixed with a feeling that there
was still room for improvement. There was another officer
whom I remember well. He was a Scotsman. He was a
very frank man in performing his duties. He would say to
me, ‘Yes, keep singing your days out, Kaunda’ as almost
invariably he found me singing to myself when working.
After his round-up, he would tell me with satisfaction he
had never seen the kitchen so clean before. I would then
thank him for his remarks and then he would leave. But he
also had a very sharp eye for prison tricks. As for my fellowprisoners, I cannot remember a single prisoner who was not
on good terms with me in our section. We got on very well.
E

I23

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Some were gentle and repentant. Very apologetically they
would say to me they realized I was not in for the same
reasons as they were. I could see they were trying to comfort
me although I needed no comforting at all.
There were also the beyond-redemption types. These
would boast of their big exploits as the rest of us sat listening.
I remember one of this type telling us he was suffering
because of his connections with some gold mines in Southern
Rhodesia. But when the truth came out it was discovered that
our friend was doing his ninth sentence for house-breaking.
These, as can be seen, are very sad human problems that
require our sympathy more than anger.
Our lunch hour came between 12.30 and 2 p.m. There was
meat for my section mates and fish for me. We also received
vegetables, rice, beans, condensed milk, cheese and golden
syrup. According to existing regulations I received four
ounces less of sugar, cheese and fish than my white and
brown counterparts. Shortly after lunch, I was ordered to
clean our primitive bucket lavatory and then I would start
preparing our evening meal which was in the main no
different from our lunch. At 5.30 p.m. I would start pacing
up and down our courtyard and then I would see, as some
guards or late-coming prisoners opened the small door, a bit
of the outside world - the green or brown of nature. Other¬
wise the only bit I saw of the outside was some branches of
a muwombo tree (it is a fibre producing tree) which was
just behind my cell and I could see it as I paced to and fro
in our courtyard. I have also some vivid memories of a little
friend which had no knowledge of me. This was a small
aeroplane which flew over our prison almost every Sunday.
At about 4 p.m. I would stand in the courtyard waiting to
wave at it. I think it must have belonged to some Lusaka
124

PRISON

flying club. There were also some very friendly magpies
which came to greet us when most of our friends from the
African section had gone to their cells. These birds would
come very close to us as if to say to us, ‘We bring greetings
from outside.’ As soon as the guards came they flew out as
if to say ‘these we cannot trust’.
I was not allowed to speak to any other African prisoner
and for that matter any African warder, except those on
duty in my section. But in prison one learns to speak all
sorts of languages; there is the normal spoken one and then
there are hand, finger, eye, head and leg languages. So when
I got up the first morning in Lusaka Prison, my fellow
black prisoners who wanted to greet me used mainly these
unspoken or symbol languages which are very difficult for
anyone to detect. In prison, information services among
inmates is first class. The spirit of oneness between them is
admirable unless they are rivals or don’t see eye to eye over
something. Although there does exist some form of friend¬
ship between guard and prisoner, it depends on circum¬
stances. A terrific amount of blackmail goes on. If, for
instance, a warder is terribly cruel to his gang, he is likely to
find himself in a position where he has been manoeuvred into
some difficulties out of which it is wellnigh impossible to
extricate himself. On the other hand, warders have a way
of putting their worst personal enemies among prisoners in
some pretty sticky spots. As a result, there is very often an
equilibrium of mutual respect struck between the two sides.
If this does not happen, then trouble is to be expected.
I was just beginning to settle down to do my nine months
in the Central Prison, Lusaka, when one of my informants
warned me that I was being moved to the Central Prison in
Salisbury. The following morning, four of us were picked
125

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

up by the superintendent and made to dress in our own
clothes. I was handcuffed to Wilson Chakulya who had been
given sixteen months for a charge of sedition. He was Secre¬
tary of our Broken Hill district as well as General Secretary
of the Central African Road Service Union of Workers.
Munukayumbwa Sipalo was handcuffed to a man called
Chirwa who had been given twenty years for alleged derail¬
ment of a train somewhere near Lusaka. The journey
between Lusaka and Salisbury was uneventful. We travelled
second class because we were told there were no European
— passengers on the bus. The countryside had changed from
the beautiful green of the rainy season to the brown of July.
I enjoyed this very much. Probably it was the confinement
within the prison walls coupled with my Kabompo love for
nature that made me pay so much attention to the brown
colouring on both sides of the road. Our first stop was at
Chirundu. At our second stop, Karoi, we asked the guard
to remove the handcuffs so that we could help ourselves but
he refused and so we travelled like this up to Salisbury. We
got to our new home rather late in the evening. It was the
first time any of us had seen such a prison. There were some
ten gates from the main entrance to my room. It is so gigantic
that it would pass for a seat of higher learning except of
course for its fantastic walls. Sipalo used to make us all
laugh by saying this place was so horrible it would make the
wildest elephant tame.
On arrival, we were given a room each in a wing that is
used for the accommodation of sick people and those in
transit. In the morning, we were issued with what is des¬
cribed as a superior uniform; regulation wear for Indians
and Euro-Africans. We were then locked up in our respec¬
tive rooms again. This made a good number of people very
126

PRISON

curious. I remember one prison officer coming along
obviously anxious to find out what ‘this trouble-maker’
looked like. For some reason which I was never able to find
out, he came dodging from one place to another, and my
guess is there must have been instructions to all not to call
on us until the top man had issued his orders. However, as
my friend came dodging towards my door, I saw him
through the usual pigeon hole through which warders speak
to their prisoners. Because he was concerned with those
outside, he did not notice I was watching him until he was
about a foot from me and as soon as he realized I was watch¬
ing him, poor fellow, he dived and went back this time in a
straight line. Actually, he became a very helpful man to me
in so far as my health was concerned in that prison.
When I reported at the office to meet the top man, he out¬
lined to me how he expected me to behave. In fact, there
was nothing out of the ordinary. I thought he was being
very reasonable. As for work he directed that I should join
the book-binding team.
Although we were working alongside non-political
prisoners, some prison officers insisted we should not mix
with any of them at any parades. One of the most difficult
prison officers to deal with happened to be on duty on the
second or third day of our stay there. As we were parading to
go in he saw us standing about five yards away from the
man at the end of the line of ordinary prisoners. Shouting
at the top of his voice he said, ‘KU - ANDA, get to the back
and take him with you (meaning Sipalo) or else I will cut
your legs off for you. And while doing so I shall be smiling
just to show there is no actual animosity.’ This man was
ex-Kenya. He was in charge of the supply of things like
toothpaste. He kept me for three solid weeks without supply-

I27

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

ing me with my much-needed toothpaste. I kept on com¬
plaining to the senior superintendent until he went in to
order this officer to bring a tube of toothpaste to me. He
was about twenty yards away from my cell when he started
calling, ‘KU . . . AND A, KU . . . AND A, KU . . .
ANDA.’ When I did not answer, he said, ‘Where is this
native they call Kuanda?’ I then said, ‘I am here, officer, how
can I help you?’ He came in and stared at me, his eyes full
of anger. After he had satisfied himself he threw the paste
at me. I said, ‘Thank you.’ He then replied to my thank
you by saying, ‘Don’t thank me. I don’t give toothpaste to
natives-go and thank the senior superintendent.’ I smiled
back. He made faces at me and then went away.
Our morning began with breakfast. Because mealie meal
porridge gave me so much stomach trouble, I took nothing
when there was no brown bread in our stock of foodstuffs
unless we had oatmeal which, of course, was very rare. I did
not complain about this to the superintendent because he
was so kind to us that very often we hesitated to approach
him if we could avoid it. I remember that each time I
thanked him for his good treatment, he would reply that he
was only performing his duties. He always gave twice as
much consideration as he was given by anyone else in prison.
He said that by behaving the way he did towards us he was
only being reciprocal. But with the exception of the very
top few, most of his subordinates took an entirely different
view. They tried to harass us as much as they could, but I
think we succeeded in refraining from giving them the
excuse they were looking for so that they could ill-treat us
to their hearts’ content. One day I remember we received an
official visit from a Federal Minister. He did not come to our
workshop but when his party was about thirty yards away,
128

PRISON

the senior superintendent called out for me. The Director
of Prisons introduced me to the Minister who said that we
had never met before although both of us came from
Northern Rhodesia. He added, ‘I understand you have been
a model prisoner here.’ I thanked him and replied that I did
not know about my being a model prisoner but that both
the senior superintendent and the Director of Prisons might
know. The senior superintendent then cracked a joke saying,
‘This man is here, sir, because he conspired to blow up the
British Empire.’ The Minister replied, ‘That should stand
him in good stead for his future responsibilities.’ Our short
chat ended that way. I respectfully withdrew as they con¬
tinued on their tour of inspection.
After breakfast, we went to parade in readiness for work.
In prisons one goes about not knowing what to expect and
this is worse when one is moved to a new prison. In Lusaka
Prison, we were exempt from the terrible habit of being
made to strip naked and then disgracefully jumping up and
down by raising one of your legs to show you were carrying
nothing in between your legs. It is a degrading custom that
I have learnt came from the Republic of South Africa as are
so many of the indignities that we suffer. White prisoners
are as a matter of our established custom exempt from this
operation. On our first day in Salisbury Prison, we had to
play tough not only to defend ourselves but also for the peace
of the prison because we knew that our countrymen were
quite ready for a big physical battle, in spite of our pleading
with them, should any warder attempt to strip us naked.
Fortunately the senior superintendent was in his office so
that when we objected, word got to him quickly and he
ruled that we should be exempt. At least we were relieved
for the time being. Two weeks after that we fell into wrong
129

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

hands. One afternoon, a white warder whom we had never
seen before came in and saw us passing by. He shouted at us
and ordered us to stop to be stripped. We stood still but no
warder came near us as almost all those present had come
to know us. However, as Providence would have it the only
senior African warder, (I don’t remember his proper rank
but I think he was a major), intervened and explained to this
white warder that it was the senior superintendent’s orders
that we should not be stripped. The white warder muttered
something and we were allowed to go on.
After our morning parade which was at 7 a.m. we went
to our workshop. We were very happy to learn bookbinding,
which was extremely interesting. Between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m.
we would go to lunch and would knock off finally for the
day at between 3 and 4 p.m. Then the rush would begin
for we all had to be in our cells shortly before 5 p.m. We all
had to rush because we had to put our stomachs straight for
the night, for although we had our chamber pots it was not
a very pleasant thought to be locked up for some fifteen
hours in a stinking cell. However, we were fortunately suffi¬
ciently organized not to have such a mishap.
We did a tremendous amount of reading in prison. We
made a special application to have extra hours for reading
and the senior superintendent was kind enough to allow us
an extra hour. Miss Joan E. Wicken, then of the Africa
Educational Trust, arranged for me to receive lectures on
elementary economics from Ruskin College. Mr George Loft
of the Society of Friends helped us with a good collection of
books from his library as well as from the U.S.A. lend¬
ing library. We also got some from the Indian Assistant
High Commissioner’s lending library. A good number
of friends like Commander Fox Pitt, Guy Clutton-Brock
130

PRISON

and many others sent us books on request which the
authorities were kind enough to inspect and allow in, so
much so that we had quite an impressive library, includ¬
ing those books we were allowed to borrow from our book¬
binding shop. From this angle, one could say it was a very
useful time. Father P. }. Walsh who had helped me with
so many books in Lusaka Prison also very kindly drove my
wife and my sixth boy to Salisbury from Lusaka to come and
see me. I was allowed to meet my wife in a room used by
white and brown prisoners on similar occasions. Only one
who has been to Salisbury Prison and has seen how black
prisoners are made to meet their relatives can appreciate how
thankful I felt that I was allowed to meet my wife in this
way. I should here also mention the fact that a good number
of letters from my friends from many parts of the world
reached me for which I am still thankful up to this time.
A letter from dear friends in prison is a priceless gem and
most of them I still keep today. They have a special value.
One other occasion I remember was when we had our
monthly cinema shows. This had a dual value. First, we
enjoyed the shows themselves tremendously and secondly,
those nights were shorter in that we were longer in the open
air than usual and, in fact, on these nights we were able to
see the sky at night; and seeing the sky at night and hearing
the barking of dogs in the distance was and will continue to
be a rare treat until those dreadful walls are removed.
Prisons are dreadful places for anyone but they have their
value for those of us who meddle in public affairs. There we
see some of God’s own children who need more care and
attention than any others collected as often as courts of law
sit. To me, these have a good case for demanding from us
spiritual, moral and material care as much as a person struck

I3I

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

down with acute pneumonia needs a physician.
The prison is what one might describe as the headquarters
of the underworld. It is a collection of people who themselves
are one of the most challenging problems to mankind. They
are such a mixture one does not know how to describe them
beyond saying they are a challenge to us. This is true of
prisoners all over the world I believe. But the problem is
made worse when the question of colour plays a dominant
part in deciding what shall be done to help them.
Going to prison for one’s convictions means going there
for a purpose. Here are some of the most terrible things I was
able to notice which could be put right if the authorities
chose to do something about the situation.
I cannot understand any reason why political prisoners
should be made to mix up with incorrigible criminals. British
colonial officials will always argue that they have hardly any
political prisoners because those that they imprison are those
who have committed ordinary crimes. Well, take my own
team to illustrate what I mean. Wilson Chakulya was in for
sedition and so was Munukayumbwa Sipalo. I was in for
conspiracy and authorizing to be held an unlawful assembly.
All these are political offences even though mine could not
by law be said to be political and yet all of us were mixed up
with other prisoners. It may be a clever way for Government
to get round this but the problem is so deeply human that it
is not right for any responsible government to dodge the
issue through legal quibbling.
In any war, prisoners of war are always kept by themselves.
I consider that freedom fighters of our type are ‘at war’
with their ‘political masters’, the only difference is that it is
not a shooting one. The fact that they do not organize to
kill does not make them any less respectable as defenders
132

PRISON

of their own and their people’s rights than soldiers who have
been taught to kill their fellow-men. I realize that this type
of argument in a world which is full of respect for violent
activities while paying lip service to non-violence cannot be
the most popular.
I have said that prison is the headquarters of the under¬
world. During the few months I was in Salisbury Prison, I
had the terrible experience of seeing young boys of between
fifteen and twenty come in as first offenders for a few weeks
and by the time they went out they had graduated so well
they came back just a few days after their first release for
longer periods. How did this happen ? When these poor boys
come in for the first time they are so scared they respond very
quickly to anyone offering them protection and in many
cases they will need it. But then those who offer them this
protection do so with terrible motives. If a boy tries to resist,
his so-called protector arranges with others to thrash him
so that by coming to the boy’s protection at the right moment,
he will submit to his unnatural desires. The organization
of these incorrigibles is so effective that warders will either
explicitly or implicitly approve of the action. From this time,
the boy is treated like a ‘housewife’. Food as well as many
other requirements in ordinary life which find their way in
prison, in spite of the strict rules, the boy now receives. This
is true, of course, of some grown-up men who agree to play
the role of women, and it applies equally to white prisoners
from what I was able to observe and hear from those white
prisoners who worked with us at book-binding. I am certain
from my observation that most of the fights in prison arise
out of jealousies over boys who are treated in this way.
During the evening, ‘lectures’ are given. Prisoners tell the
most fantastic stories of their exploits. These are repeated
T33

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

often, at places of work, on Saturdays and Sundays, and at
every opportune moment - so that they sink into the minds
of these youngsters or grown-ups who might have come as
political offenders. Of course, some of these fantastic stories
are true and some are just fabrications of ‘theories’ with
which ‘the lecturer’ would like someone else to experiment.
In this way, decent society is losing more and more.
Is it beyond our reach to come to grips with this problem
in a young country such as ours? I know that people trained
to do this type of job have been at it probably burning oil
long after midnight, but this does not stop laymen like
myself discussing it. In fact, I am encouraged to take this
issue in this way mainly because I am convinced that very
little is being done to help. I am convinced, further, that
many of these people whom I have myself here called incorrigibles are not altogether lost to normal society if genuine
efforts could be made to save them. I realize too that one
cannot do much when our society outside the prison walls is
so soiled, in so far as Africans are concerned, that some of
these Salisbury prisoners used to say plainly that they were
better off where they were than outside. They would argue
they could never hope to find work, they would be harassed
by the police for passes, tax receipts, and many other things.
A society that drives some of its citizens to think in this way
is rotten and needs burying. Here we are guilty of a serious
offence for which we are bound to pay heavily unless changes
come quickly and an entirely different approach is made
almost immediately to this problem. When I say this, I am
not obsessed at all; I am basing my argument on facts and
figures. Think of the thousands of boys and girls who don’t
find places at schools. What is there to stop them ‘graduating’
at this underworld ‘university’ by the thousand?

J34

PRISON

Having said so much about my observations of my fellowmen in prison, it is only fair that I should say a word or two
on the activities of religious men and justices who came to
visit us. From my observation, I could see that these men
were sincere and meant to be of some help and I believe some
of them went away with a feeling that they were helping
their fellow-men who were less fortunate. But I am sorry
to say very little was achieved by them. Every Sunday morn¬
ing, clergymen came to help us spiritually. Only prisoners
who wanted to attend services were allowed out of their
dormitory cells and I think I am correct in saying that about
95 per cent came out. On our first Sunday, we noticed that
there was a big gathering in a certain corner, far more than
any of the other five or six groups put together. The man
in charge had to shout to be heard. I thought that was a
very popular church in prison. The following Sunday, the
same corner was very much crowded but to my surprise
there was a different man from a different church and on the
third Sunday, noticing the same thing, a big crowd and yet
a third clergyman from another church, we began to wonder
what was happening. We found out later that it was not the
popularity of any one church that was involved but simply
that this was the sunniest corner of the prison yard. Any
priest who chose such a place was bound to get a very good
attendance. Whether or not the priests themselves knew this,
I don’t know. I don’t even know which churches were in¬
volved but they were both black and white. The teaching
that went on could perhaps have converted some of these
people towards right thinking and right living and to their
Lord and Master but Sunday after Sunday we sat and
listened and I watched but could hardly see any change.
Those whose behaviour was admirable almost invariably had

T35

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

come to prison as such. The question now is this: did these
priests know that the people they were preaching to were
not really receptive to the message ? Is it not the task of the
Christian church to take stock of its successes and its failures
especially where sinners of that type are concerned? Is this
what takes place in all other prisons? If the answer is a ‘yes’,
then obviously something must be done about this.
With regard to visiting justices, most of these rare visitors
during my two spells in prison left me with the impression
that there was much to be desired here. I must say right
away that those of us who knew what we were in prison
for could get or expect help from these justices, but the per¬
son who needed their help most, the common man who feels
lost in such a place, did not even get near them. In fact, he
did not even know why they were there. These people could
be a force for good if only they could come down to earth.
I do not know how they handled white prisoners but I can
only go by how they handled those of us who were educated
and, therefore, deduce that white prisoners must have got
much more attention. It might be argued that the question
of great numbers of Africans in prisons at any given time
accounts for the fact that white prisoners whose numbers are
far less receive more attention and, by the same token, it
could be argued that the same is the reason why the vocal and
enlightened black prisoner receives some attention because
he is not in such vast numbers. This is one of the many
tragedies of modern societies. They tend to leave the weakest
to fend for themselves. If any society has any right to claim
a place amongst the modern enlightened societies surelv it
must be prepared to meet such human problems as this. The
trouble here is that apart from half-hearted efforts or attempts
by a badly financed department of social welfare, it seems
136

U.N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

to me that those in authority don’t even know that this
problem exists. I am convinced beyond doubt that some of
these people could be saved if we could treat these moral and
spiritual diseases with the seriousness physicians treat serious
cases of pneumonia for, in both cases, people are dying. The
difference is that in the one case they are dying physically
and in the other, morally.

16

U.N.I.P. and the Church

On 18 December, I was told to get my clothes from the store¬
room for pressing. I knew something was in the offing. That
evening or early in the morning, my mind is not very clear,
I was told that I was going back to Northern Rhodesia. To
begin with I was supposed to fly with a warder but as there
was only one seat on the plane that day, Sir John Moffat
was allowed to give me a lift back to Lusaka. We had a full
corporal in the back seat of Sir John’s car. I remember how
once again the fullness of life came to me as on both sides of
the road, for over three hundred miles, we had nothing but
the o
green of our December. It is one of the most memorable
drives of my life and I am grateful to Sir John Moffat who,
by helping me in this way, exposed himself to the bitter
public attack of Mr John Gaunt. It will be appreciated how
much I feel about this because, for five full months, I had
:37

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

been shut off from all natural beauty. We stopped on the
way for lunch and arrived in Lusaka late at night. I went
back to my familiar cell. Nothing eventful happened except
that I must mention, with thanks, some of the kind friends
who came to visit me like the Rev. E. G. Nightingale, Father
P. J. Walsh, some members of the Prison Aid Society, Mr
Harry Franklin and, of course, countless numbers of my
fellow Africans.
On 9 January, the great prison gates were flung open and
I was ffietHby my lawyer, a press man and a photographer. I
was released a day earlier because the ioth was a Sunday and
no releases are made on Sundays, and I at once issued the
following statement:
‘Freedom! All I am asking the Africans of Northern
Rhodesia is that they should remain calm and patient; and
should prepare themselves for the real non-violent struggle
that lies ahead.
‘The Zambia African Congress was banned, but there is no
power to ban our desire to be free, to shape our own destiny.
In this struggle for freedom, we will tell the present rulers
to realize that the colour of man should not count; what
should count is his behaviour. We, the African people of
Northern Rhodesia, are out to get power not for its own sake,
but because we believe that it is the solution to our problems.
‘I am prepared to unite all Africans who have the welfare
of their people at heart. I would support a leaders’ round¬
table conference only if I were certain that such a meeting
was not held merely to show the world that African leaders
in Northern Rhodesia could come together; I would like to
see real unity achieved.
‘I am determined more than ever before to achieve selfgovernment for Africans in this country. Detentions, im138

U. N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

prisonments and rural-area restrictions will only delay, but
will not stop us from reaching that goal, which should be
reached this year, i960.
‘I repeat that the Africans of Northern Rhodesia must be
patient. We will negotiate with the British government and
the Governor here. I will demand constitutional changes
now. I hear that the new Colonial Secretary, Iain Macleod,
is a man of great understanding. I am certain he will be
sympathetic.
‘We shall soon be putting before him our constitutional
proposals which will be framed at the forthcoming confer¬
ence of the United National Independence Party on 31 .
January. It is time that power shifted from the minority
group to the majority, and by this I mean universal adult
suffrage which is popularly known as “one man, one vote”.
‘I am hopeful that this can be achieved through a non¬
violent struggle. I, therefore, ask you all to be calm, patient
and non-violent. I know your grievances. I know you have
been calm and patient for a long time, but that should not
make you behave otherwise. Give us your undivided support
and loyalty, and we, as leaders, will fight for the freedom
which we rightly deserve in a non-violent way.’
I was out of prison. On 31 January, I was elected to the
Presidency of U.N.I.P. unopposed, thanks to Brother Mainza
Chona who kindly stepped down to the Deputy Presidency
of the party.
As soon as I began to address public meetings, I found that
the presence of Northern Rhodesian police at every meeting '
could easily lead to violence. On the last day of January i960,
I addressed an enthusiastic gathering of my supporters at
Kabwata. Several times the police officer in charge of the
tape-recording machine came up to the speaking dais to
J39

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

adjust the microphone or note the speaker’s name. Each time
he was greeted with shouts of disapproval from the crowd.
At one point, an altercation broke out between the record¬
ing officer and some of my followers blocking his path to
the dais. It was with the greatest difficulty that I managed to
control the crowd but I kept insisting that our policy was
one of nonviolence. I remember saying, ‘If, because of our
policy, you are lifted in the air and thrown to the ground, say
“Kill me, but I shall be free.” I was determined to combine
Gandhi’s policy of non-violence with Nkrumah’s positive
action.
All the time I was aware of the terrible danger of some of
the young extreme elements of my party getting out of control
and causing riots. In any nationalist organization there are
bound to be ‘roughs and toughs’ who want to force the pace,
and a way must be found of dealing with them. I suppose the
method used by the British Labour party is one of the best.
There one finds all sorts of people who hold widely differ¬
ing views on this and that subject. They all, however, re¬
spect the views held by the majority of their group. This is
one of those arts we must develop here in African parties if
our yearning for constitutional democracy is to come to stay.
‘One man, one vote’ is now our watchword. We should
stress, and indeed do stress, the importance of this not onlv
at general elections but also as the only rightful method of
deciding issues even within our own parties. Once this is
grasped, it follows that a well-disciplined party will make its
decisions by its majority binding. This, of course, is assuming
that those ‘roughs and toughs’ are in the minority. If, on the
other hand, those ‘roughs and toughs’ go out of their way
to disregard majority decisions, they should be disciplined
accordingly.
140

U. N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

Sir John Moffat at this time moved a resolution in the
Legislative Council of Northern Rhodesia stating that
opposition to Federation had increased and that it was clear
the present form of Federation could not last, and called for
an association of states likely to be acceptable to the majority
of the people. His motion was defeated by 21 votes to 7. This
convinced me more than ever that we would never get our
freedom by fighting the battle within the Legislative Council
under the constitution then existing. The fight would have to
be carried on by building up a strong party to force constitu¬
tional changes.
I determined on out-and-out opposition to the Central
African Federation. I was not against federation in principle
but against the Federation which had been imposed on us.
I refused to give evidence to the Monckton Commission. I
gave my reasons for this decision in full in Blac\ Govern¬
ment?, a book which I wrote at that time.
At the end of March, I wrote to the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, Iain Macleod, setting out my reasons for want¬
ing a change in the Constitution:
‘We have already submitted our case for SELF-GOVERN¬
MENT NOW, but I wish to sum up the case as follows:
1 THAT we do ask for the graceful transfer of power from
minority groups to the majority not only because we believe
it is the God-given right of any people to rule themselves
but because we believe quite sincerely that if an atmosphere
of racial harmony and peace which we need in order to
develop and exploit our abundant natural resources, is to
be created, the majority must rule.
2 THAT such government minority groups need not have
any fears that their interests might be jeopardized because

H1

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

when we say we believe that ‘all men are created equal
and that they are endowed with certain inalienable rights,
among them LIFE, LIBERTY and the PURSUIT of
HAPPINESS’, we mean this applies to all men on earth
regardless of their race, creed, etc. We have no intention
of replacing the present form of oppression with one of our
own. As a mark of our goodwill, we have proposed as an
effective safeguard for minority groups, if we could not
be trusted, the retention of the Governor, Chief Secretary,
Finance Minister and Attorney-General. This in itself
is sufficient evidence to show we mean to keep our
word.
3 THAT note should be taken of the fact that what is hap¬
pening in both North and South Africa is influencing the
situation here greatly. What I mean here is the getting of
independence by our fellow Africans in the Congo and
Tanganyika. The fact that some of our people have got
their fellow tribesmen and relatives in the Congo and
Tanganyika quite naturally adds to the unrest. Nor does
the shooting of innocent Africans by the Verwoerd govern¬
ment help matters.
4 THAT the spending of only ten days in Northern
Rhodesia and ten days in Nyasaland is a slight on the
leadership of Africans of Northern Rhodesia who believe
in non-violent struggle. It is being interpreted to mean that
the British government will only move when there is blood¬
shed. To clear this unfortunate interpretation of the Secre¬
tary of State’s action which perhaps in normal circum¬
stances could have been accepted quickly, I believe it is
advisable for the Secretary of State to announce an earlier
date than October this year for a round-table conference
for constitutional talks to which all interested parties
142

U. N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

should be invited. This will put the fears and anxieties of
Africans at rest.
‘Sir, allow me to end by saying that such myths as “plural
society”, “partnership” and “multi-racial society” have
meant domination of our indigenous people by immigrant
races. To us, who actually feel the physical and mental
strains, these have come to mean a thin disguise for white
supremacy.
‘Sir, the task before the British government is to choose
between establishing in good time, which means your
moving now, a truly British way of life which means making
every citizen of and above the age of 21 a source of power
and thereby establishing a democracy in which all people
shall be happy and in which indeed Britain shall remain a
friend of the people OR pleasing minority groups, which
means maintaining the status quo, with the inevitable result
of bitter racial strife and Britain remaining an enemy of
Africans for ever. In any case, I don’t think it is possible to
reverse the trend of events. The clock, and nobody knows
this better than you do, if I may go by what you have said
and done for other countries, cannot be put back any longer.
‘We have shown that we are a patient and long-suffering
people. We are humanitarians and have no time for the
colour of a person. We respond favourably to the Christian
concept of man. Because of this attitude of mind we are being
supported by an ever-increasing number of European and
Asian liberals, but they will not come out openly at present
owing to the situation created by Sir Roy Welensky, the
Federal Prime Minister.’
While I was determined to get the constitution changed
the Europeans were determined to maintain the status quo.
At Kitwe, at the beginning of March i960, Mr John Roberts,
M3

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

the leader of the United Federal Party in Northern Rhodesia,
said, ‘I say now, and I have good grounds for saying it, that
there is no desire or intention on the part of the British
government to review the present franchise or Constitution
during the life of the present legislature.’ That meant for
another four years. At the same time, the more extreme
Europeans under the leadership of Mr John Gaunt were
forming what they called the ‘Northern Rhodesia Associa¬
tion’. More than 1,000 whites packed Lusaka’s largest cinema
and heard John Gaunt call upon them to ‘fight for their
rights’.
I had been invited to go to America and I determined to
call on Iain Macleod to ask him to give us a new constitu¬
tion. It was while I was in London that I received the terrible
news of the death of a European woman, Mrs Burton, whose
car had been burnt after a political meeting. Mainza Chona
gave me the news while I was at a press conference. I was
deeply shocked and could hardly find words to express my¬
self. I said that I did not know who had done this thing,
whether it was followers of my own party or unknown
hooligans. Whoever it was, I deeply regretted it. When my
words were reported in Northern Rhodesia, a member of the
Legislative Council spoke of them as the ‘antithesis of sin¬
cerity’. I have sometimes wondered whether I was doing any
good at all by condemning violence publicly. If I remained
quiet, I was told that I was condoning violence; if I spoke
about it, I was told that I was insincere. Mr John Roberts,
the leader of Welensky’s party in Northern Rhodesia, com¬
menting on my statement about the death of Mrs Burton,
said, ‘I am not the least bit impressed by mere public affirma¬
tions of non-violence. It is from U.N.I.P. meetings where
hatred is preached that acts of lawlessness spring. It is at
144

U. N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

these meetings, many of which are held after beer drinks,
that a state of mind amounting to hysterical frenzy is worked
up among the listeners.’ It is a very great temptation some¬
times when one is spoken of in this way to ask what really
would happen if we tried to use violence instead of all the
time trying to prevent it.
At this time, it was comforting for me to know that some
churches were speaking out openly against the Federation.
Many missionaries had been hoodwinked by the talk of
‘partnership’ and believed that Federation would be good for
us, but gradually many had come round to understand that
we had been right all along in our suspicions. I was en¬
couraged to read in the Northern News one day that five
Copperbelt clergymen, and one layman, representing African
membership within the United Church, made a blunt policy
statement in which they said, ‘It is our responsibility to help
bring to a peaceful end the present form of Federation. We
are as determined as the political groups to see the end of a
form of government that rules without the consent of the
majority, that imprisons people without trial and has done
little to remove discrimination.’
The United Church claims the largest African Protestant
Church following on the Copperbelt. Their statement un¬
reservedly backed the Africans’ quest for self-govern¬
ment.
The statement announced the Copperbelt African
churches’ own private boycott of the Monckton Commission
‘because the terms of reference do not allow people to say
what they want to say about the Federation’. The African
Churches’ Council merely sent the Commission a written
protest, and declined to appear before it.
At this point, I should digress to give my views about the
*45

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Church and politics because this is a matter of the greatest
importance for the future.
As I have already related, I was brought up in a Christian
home and my Christian belief is part of me now. It is still my
habit to turn to God in prayer asking for His guidance. I do
not think I have ever seriously doubted the truth of the
Gospel, but I seriously question sometimes whether God is
really speaking to us in the voice of the organized churches
as I see them in Northern Rhodesia today. There may be
many good reasons why the Christian Gospel came to us in
the form of the ‘denominations’ of the West, but I cannot see
any good reason for those same denominations continuing in
these days. We become more and more confused as new sects
from the West spring up in our towns. How can I believe
in the sincerity of Christians who, in Lusaka alone (European
population 14,000), hold seventeen separate denominational
services for Europeans every Sunday. This denominational
idiocy is a terrible condemnation of Christianity and is a
confusion to my people and to myself. In my days at Lubwa,
I had begun to question certain things in the life of the
mission which seemed incompatible with the teaching of
Christ in the Bible. I could not see why the European
missionaries should have special seats in the church and why
the Rev. Paul Mushindo went about on foot or on a cycle
while the missionaries rode around in cars.
I found myself wandering in a spiritual wilderness and I
became very bitter, as the following extract from a letter
which I wrote to the missionaries at Lubwa in March 1952
well illustrates. I had been reading Bernard Shaw’s Man of
Destiny and I wrote:
‘When (the Englishman) wants a new market for his
adulterated Manchester goods, he sends a missionary to teach
146

U.N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

the Natives the Gospel of Peace. The Natives kill the
missionary, he flies to arms in defence of Christianity, fights
for it, conquers for it, and takes the market as a reward from
heaven.’
In spite of my early revolt against the missionaries, I knew
that the Christian religion had something important to say
to us in our political movement. We were alway s looking for
Christians to support us in our struggle.
In March 1953 at the Congress Delegates’ Conference at
Kitwe, we had decided to call our people to observe two
days of prayer to ask God to assist us in our struggle against
Federation. The Churches, except the African Methodist
Episcopal Church of course, ignored this, saying that the
African National Congress had no authority to call people to
prayer. Only the Governor should do such a thing. Each
missionary took his own line of action illustrated by the com¬
pletely different attitudes of two brothers. One at the Kafue
Training Institute gathered with the staff for prayer on the
occasion, while the other at Mumbwa had a teacher dismissed
for being absent from work on that day. Our National Presi¬
dent, Mr Harry Nkumbula, made a statement after the Day
of Prayer in which he said:
‘The two days of National Prayer are over. I must thank
the observers of those days. It has been alleged by the govern¬
ment that the Congress has deliberately fixed these days for
prayer to God in order to disrupt the country’s economy. I
must tell the government that this is a misunderstanding of
Congress’s plans. The Congress leaders decided to have these
two days of National Prayer in order to pray to God for
assistance in their struggle against Federation. The people
were told to observe those days with great reverence and were
asked to refrain from any activities which might lead to disM7

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

turbance. I am indeed grateful for the co-operation of the
people who observed the days.
‘Apart from worshipping God, the days served as a testing
case for the African Anti-Federationists and also to see what
the reactions of the government and the employers would be.
I must deplore the reactions of the government and employers
to the days of National Prayer. The government instructed
the employers to dismiss those who observed the days, and
also to evict them from their quarters. I am sure I cannot be
too far wrong in saying that the government intended to
intimidate the Africans who are fighting against Federation,
and also to incite the people against the Congress.’
In that year, 1953, we were deeply hurt by the imposition of
Federation, and very sensitive to any attacks made on us. We
believed sincerely that we were fighting in a righteous cause
but the very churches which had taught us the meaning of
the fatherhood of God and the dignity of man seemed to be
against us in our struggle.
The Minutes of the Regional Pan-African Council held in
the Ex-Askaris Memorial Hall on 10 and 11 December 1953
show clearly that we were at that time in no way opposed
to Christianity. We invited Mr Meembe of the African
Methodist Episcopal Church to our Conference and his
address is reported in full in the Minutes. What he said is
well worth mentioning for it refutes the accusation frequently
made against us that we were anti-Christian racialists.
‘We are all brothers, for we are all children of God, and we
should work together. No man can hate his fellow man or
try to stop his progress, or keep him from enjoying all the
fruits and rights of his country and of salvation in Christ.
‘While we are all children of our earthly parents by physical
birth, we become by spiritual birth, in a special sense, the
148

U. N. I. P.

AND

THE

CHURCH

children of God. And in that spiritual relationship, all men
should live in peace and love. If people do not belong to our
race, colour or nation we must not hate them, for we are
all God’s children, and God’s children must work together
to banish sin from the heart and not to work against one
another.
‘I believe this is the aim of this Conference of the PanAfrican Council assembled here today. White and black
should live and work together. Not white against black and
black against white, may god bless you all.’
By 1957, we were fighting the Federal Franchise Bill and
the Constitution Amendment Bill. I think we were all
delighted that the Christian Council of Northern Rhodesia
for once seemed to be in line with us.
We were encouraged by this evidence that the Church was
on the march, and fully in agreement with the editor of the
African Times who wrote, ‘Never before has the Church in
Northern Rhodesia been so bold as to speak out against
Government when its policies and practices have been seen to
violate Christian morality.’ In a young country like Northern
Rhodesia, churches have a big part to play in its development.
They cannot hope to succeed by confining their work to
church buildings.
Christian principles can never be split, they have either to
be accepted, or sacrificed as they are. In our opinion, for
Christian Churches not to condemn racial discrimination,
whefheF”practised by black or white governments, or any
other groups, is to sacrifice Christian principles. What is
immoral cannot safely be passed as Christianly right.
In i960, I set out in the book Blac\ Government? my
views on the subject of Missions in the life of the country
and I have no reason to change what I said then.
149

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

It is my firm belief that we need an increasing number of
Christian men and women in all political parties. It was our
good Lord who said that his disciples should be the salt of
the earth, but I am sorry to say that many Christians are
prevented from joining political parties. For example, many
Christian teachers fear to join our U.N.I.P. openly because
they fear that they will be put on a black list either by their
missionary managers or by Education Officers. I get angrv
when the official Church tells me to control my people and
prevent hooliganism but they do not raise any finger at all to
encourage their people to take an active interest in our
political movements.
One of the great difficulties is that the police in the towns
do not give permission for political meetings to be held on
Sunday afternoons. I am therefore forced to hold them on
Sunday morning which interferes with Sunday morning
worship. This puts a big strain on many of my good members
who have to choose whether to attend my meetings or go to
church.
I am now the member of no church and yet feel myself to be
a member of every church. I have hardly any opportunity of
attending public worship and all I can do is sometimes to
read and pray in my house. I do not think the Church in
Northern Rhodesia understands the terrible danger it is in.
Because the Christian Church in this country has so often
failed to practise what it preaches in the matter of race and
politics, thousands of my fellow Africans have rejected it.
Although as yet many have kept their faith in the Christian
message, they and their children will also lose that if the
Church is not seen to consist of people who carry the teaching
of Christ into every part of life. I am always hoping the
Church will put its own house in order because our new
150

A

YEAR

OF

DECISION

nation of Zambia needs thousands of true Christians at this
time.

*7

A Year of Decision

The first full party working committee of the United
National Independent Party was called in August i960 and
I spoke at length to the delegates, setting before them our
objectives and the methods we would use to achieve our aims.
I warned them of the grim struggle which lay ahead: ‘Today,
you have Special Branch men and women following
wherever you go as if you were criminals; today you stand
the chance of being sent to jail for shouting slogans like
“FREEDOM NOW”; today you are liable to be deported
from your own home for the “offence” of telling your people
this was their country and it was their birthright to rule them¬
selves. This is where we stand today. The terrible stories that
have been written about struggles in India, Egypt, Ghana,
and other countries that were once upon a time ruled by
Britain, are taking place right here. Sad though these things
are, they serve one useful purpose and that is they all are a
pointer to the fact that we are moving in the right direction.
I wish to repeat what I said when in exile in Kabompo: that
British imperialists never exile or imprison political fools.’
151

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

I told them that if we failed to organize for independence
because we feared prison or exile, it simply meant we were
not ready to take over. ‘The white man lords it over us in all
walks of life not because he happens to be white but because
he is better organized than we are; that is his secret. Our task
is now to mobilize all the forces that we can for self-govern¬
ment now. This is no small task at all. It means choosing your
friends well here and abroad, it calls for sincerity of purpose,
determination and courage, self-discipline. Indeed, it calls for
'the three Nkrumah “S’s” - service, sacrifice and suffer¬
ing. Nothing can be achieved anywhere and in any field
without good organization. For those who have succeeded
in life good and effective organization were their watch¬
words. We are capable of organizing effectively here if only
we can seriously put our heads together.
‘To organize for anything effectively, you must have clear
in your own mind what you want, and how you mean to
get it. We of U.N.I.P. know what we want, self-government
now, and we also know how to get it, through non-violent
means plus positive action.
‘When we organize our people, it is important to note that
we are building an organization that should not only get us
self-government and, ultimately, independence, but an
organization sufficiently strong to run our government. Put¬
ting it briefly, we are organizing to bring into being here a
government of the people, by the people and indeed for the
people. We criticize and condemn the present set-up as un¬
democratic, unethical and entirely un-Christian and, there¬
fore, unworthy of self-respecting people. It is a government
of the privileged few, by the privileged few and for the privi¬
leged few. It is these few that the Welensky governments in
Central Africa are arming. He is creating all-white battalions,

J52

A

YEAR

OF

DECISION

in spite of the existing regiments which are mixed racially.
All this should not surprise us, although we condemn it
unreservedly, because it is part of the privileged few’s
organization in order to perpetuate here their rule of
oppression and suppression.
'Now, in a situation like ours where the oppressor is armed
to the hilt, the oppressed, before man discovered the com¬
paratively new method of passive resistance, had either to
succumb to oppression or come out in open revolt against it.
History is full of such incidents. Succumbing to oppression is
undignified and unworthy of any self-respecting man. On
the other hand, open revolt often leads to the killing of
countless people, those very people for whom freedom is
sought. So we resort to the third method-the method oh
passive resistance or non-violent methods plus positive^
action. It is easy to succumb to oppression and grumble
silently. It is, of course, less difficult to organize an open
revolt, but it is more difficult to organize a non-violent
struggle in that it calls for conviction on the part of all partici¬
pants. This type of movement obviously calls for extensive
coaching and very often results come after a long time, and
this needs much more discipline than an open revolt. But the
fruits of this training stand the participants in good stead
when they take over the reins of government. This is
the method we have chosen. We have no intention at
all of making our people cannon-fodder for colonialist
guns.’
It was not the first time that this method had been used in
Northern Rhodesia. I reminded them of the first non-violent
struggle for social reform and the sense of pride and self-re¬
spect engendered in all who participated. It puzzled those
who were armed to meet non-violence with violence. They

*53

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

had no alternative but to send those simple but self-respecting
ordinary but spiritually newly-born black men, women and
children to prison. It was indeed very moving and memor¬
able to see humble people choose to go to prison rather than
buy meat through pigeon-holes and stand exposed to all
natural forces in long queues. British prisons were filled from
Livingstone to Abercorn, and from Fort Jameson to Chingola. This wonderful campaign was organized between 1953
and 1957 to effect a measure of social reform.
At meetings up and down the country I repeatedly stressed
the need for a well-lubricated party political machine. Every
single member of the party must be kept in constant and
close touch with party headquarters. The party must be¬
come the trusted mouthpiece of all the people, so that each
and every one would be ready to suffer, if necessary, together,
in the cause of freedom. This kind of solidarity was even
more necessary after independence had been achieved.
No organization of any type, industrial, social or political,
can survive without discipline. It brings self-control, and is
of the utmost importance in a political party. Both leaders
and ordinary members must submit to it, but the leaders par¬
ticularly, must set a good example. They are closely watched
by their followers and much depends on how they conduct
themselves. In a campaign employing methods of non¬
violence, discipline is even more vital, especially when the
tide of nationalism is rising all the time.
By the end of 1961, Mr Iain Macleod was urging my party
to attend the Federal Review Conference in London. I went
unwillingly because I could see no point in reviewing a
Federation which I and my party was committed to destroy.
As I expected, this conference achieved nothing; however, it
gave me the opportunity to continue the pressure for a con-

*54

A

YEAR

OF

DECISION

ference to review our Northern Rhodesian constitution. This
conference which finally met in London was boycotted by
the United Federal Party, but it was there that Iain Macleod
first proposed the now famous three-fifteen plan.
We went to the London conference believing that we had
the support of the Northern Rhodesian .Liberal Party led by
Sir John Moffat for our claim for an African majority in the
next Legislative Council. Right at the end of the conference,
Mr Macleod seemed to do a deal with the Liberal Party
behind our backs. We were bitterly disappointed and it was
then that I issued what has come to be known as my ‘Mau
Mau’ statement. This needs some explanation because it is
still quoted against me.
On 9 February 1961, I issued a statement headed, my
people are tired, in which I warned that should Welensky
and the British government continue to frustrate the legiti¬
mate aspirations of the African people of Zambia, a mass
rising might result in Northern Rhodesia which would make
Mau Mau seem a child’s picnic.
As far as I was concerned, Mau Mau meant not only a
massacre of white people by black people, but also a massacre
of blacks by whites. Over the previous months, the Europeans
of Northern Rhodesia, encouraged by Welensky and his
Northern Rhodesian leader, John Roberts, had been be¬
having in a manner likely to cause tension and crisis.
Troops had openly carried arms in the streets. The gun
shops on the Copperbelt were doing a roaring trade in
firearms to the European population. Had my people
not behaved themselves more decently than the whites, a
single incident could have resulted in mass shootings of
Africans by panicky white settlers. Would not then Mau
Mau have looked like a child’s picnic? With only this differF

155

j'

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

ence, that instead of mass graves for whites, we would have
been having mass graves for blacks.
As soon as the results of the London conference were made
known, Welensky and Greenfield, his clever Minister of
Law, got to work and by some kind of back door diplomacy
managed to get the plan changed in favour of the United
Federal Party. In June, the Governor of Northern Rhodesia
announced a constitution which came as a bitter shock to us
all. When I first read the White Paper, I could hardly be¬
lieve my eyes. I had always told my people to trust the
British government, and I personally had great regard for
Iain Macleod. Now we had been deceived once again and
we were very angry. Even the Christian Council of Northern
Rhodesia which was meeting at Kitwe in June just after the
new proposals were announced was moved to pass a Resolu¬
tion which stated:
‘The Council consider that the present proposals for the
Northern Rhodesian Constitution will intensify racial
antagonisms and thereby fail to provide the basis for the
building of that orderly non-racial society which is the earnest
desire of the Christian Church, and that they are, therefore, a
burden on the Christian conscience because it is clear that
the proposals are unacceptable to the great majority of the
people.’
j,
The Annual Conference of U.N.I.P. had been called to
meet at Mulungushi on 9 July. There we denounced the new
proposals and I knew that the time had come to start positive
action. The British government had taken advantage of my
reasonableness and had given way to pressure from the
Federal government.
There were 3,000 people at that conference, every one of
whom was deeply angered by what had been done to us.

!

156

A

YEAR

OF

DECISION

They wanted action immediately and I have never before
been so conscious of the latent force of anger in a people.
Strangely enough, I myself felt a deep peace. The crowd did
not want to listen to me when I urged on them the absolute
necessity for our struggle to remain non-violent. Had I at
that moment departed from my belief in the power of non¬
violence, I dare not think what bloodshed would have taken
place in our land.
I told members of the conference to go and tell our Chiefs
and people that our would-be protectors had succumbed to
pressure from Welensky in Salisbury, and to Lord Salisbury
and Tory back benchers, in order to maintain their ugly
Federation. ‘The British government has betrayed us; they
have sold us down the cold river of white supremacy in the
same way as their predecessors did in the Union of South
Africa about fifty years ago. They are treating us like pieces
of dirt. Shall we any longer trust them ? At least my trust in
them is finished. In my own mind’s eye, I can still see Mr
Macleod’s face. It is a trustworthy face in so far as I am
able to discern faces and read other people’s minds. Many
fellow-colonial leaders have told me the same about him.
What then has gone wrong with him over Northern
Rhodesia P He has made no efforts to meet our demands for
a clear African majority. Instead, he gives us something un¬
paralleled in colonial history. The British prime minister
lectured us about ‘noble principles’, ‘goodwill between races’
and the importance of the ‘give and take’ spirit. All he meant
was that we should be principled, and not Welensky; good¬
will between men of all races should come from us only and
not Welensky; and that in this spirit of give and take we
should do all the giving while Welensky does all the taking.
I am afraid I am a most shocked and disappointed man. We

*57

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

are being sacrificed at the altar of foreign politics. They gave
in to Welensky in order to save Whitehead’s referendum
which means saving Welensky himself and, therefore, saving
the Federation at the expense of our political advancement;
the very thing successive colonial secretaries have assured us
would not happen. Does this way of behaving call for any
more trust? I have said already, mine is shaken to the founda¬
tion. The big question is, where do we go to from now?
‘I know full military and police preparations are going on
in the Union of South Africa, in this rotten Federation of
Rhodesia and Nyasaland, in Angola and Mozambique. I
know too that military pacts are being made between these
three foreign powers to try and entrench their governments
on the soil that is not theirs. They can claim to have lived here
since 1400. The fact still remains, this is African soil. It is here
we are born; it is here we die. Countrymen, this is a fitting
moment for me to say like Shakespeare, ‘Our legions are
brim full, our cause is ripe.’ U.N.I.P. has become a most
powerful organization because each member has played his
part honestly, sincerely, truthfully, and untiringly; and be¬
cause we have based our policy on humanitarian principles.
The battle still remains the same. It is not anti-white, but
anti-wrong. We have many friends among men of all races.
We shall not fight against white racialists and at the same
time be racialistic ourselves.
‘Nor will we lose our sense of direction. To our European
friends and comrades in the struggle, I say yours is not an
easy task either. You will meet with many difficulties. You
will be ostracized in your own community and you will be
doubted by the very people you like to associate with. But
knowing as you do that the course you have chosen is the
right one, you will stick to your guns and continue to show
158

A

YEAR

OF

DECISION

other people, misled by wrong principles, that peace here
can only come when the principle of African majority rule
is established. I don’t envy your position at all but you have
my blessing.
‘To our Asian friends and comrades in the struggle, I say
you know what we are trying to do. You faced it in your
countries of origin. You know we are doing the right thing.
Most of you are also men of principle. You have openly
supported us.
‘To our Euro-African people, we say we welcome you
as members of our society. For some rime you were misled
by the powers that be. You discovered their trick of divide
and rule. You came back to where you truly belonged and
belong. They are now beginning to make attempts to
separate you once again; to tempt you into falling an easy
prey to their propaganda. You know the truth. You will no
doubt stick to your beliefs.
‘I have repeatedly asked the people of Northern Rhodesia
to be patient and non-violent in thought, word and deed.
But I have recently had to remove one of these noble words
from my vocabulary. It is ‘patience’. Welensky refused to be
patient, and he got what he wanted. We who were patient
have been neglected.
‘The time has now come for us to show even more
discipline in carrying out our policies. We will have to act in
a positive but non-violent way.’
The days that followed the Mulungushi Conference were
anxious days. Most of the country remained peaceful but in
the Northern Province the long years of frustration spilled
over into violence. In went the mobile unit of the Northern
Rhodesian police and the white troops of the Federal army.
Schools were burnt down, whole villages were gutted by

*59

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

fire; about eight Africans were killed in various incidents
by the security forces of Welensky’s army. No one more than
I regrets the violence that took place in the Northern
Province, but if you drive an animal into a corner and tor¬
ment it, you may expect that in its fear and rage it will slash
back at you.
There are always those who say that violence pays and
that it was what happened in the Northern Province that
made the British government once again change its mind.
It is not for me to say what goes on in Whitehall, all I know
is that now in 1962 we have been given a constitution in
which we have decided to work for majority rule in Northern
Rhodesia. For the first time in our history we may be able to
use the ballot box to break up this ugly Central African
Federation.
For a long time I have led my people in their shouts of
kwacha (the dawn). We have been shouting it in the dark¬
ness; now there is the grey light of dawn on the horizon
and I know that Zambia will be free.

160

APPENDIX I
A HISTORICAL NOTE

To understand, or even to begin to understand our troubles of
today one must go right back into history and start with what
was known as the Partition of Africa, or more colloquially, the
Scramble for Africa. It has been well described in the following
words:
The closing years of the nineteenth century were marked
by an advance of the white races upon the continent of Africa
which in its circumstance was a unique phenomenon in
history. This invasion was the product of forces over which
governments have little control, and which it is not easy to
identify. Two phenomena may be suggested. One was the
passion for adventure which expressed itself in the cosmo¬
politan stream which flowed continuously into and through
Africa - a flow in which scores of men risked, and in the
majority of instances ultimately sacrificed, their lives to the
ardour of discovery.
The other phenomenon was the slave-raiding horror
which the reports of Livingstone and his contemporaries in
the ’60s and ’70s first made vivid to the Christian public.
Cynical commentators have doubted the genuineness and ex¬
tent of the revolt of conscience which was roused by the revela¬
tion of preventable human agony on a vast scale. But its
reality was witnessed to by the stubbornness of resolve which
it engendered. A multiplicity of individual motives, mingled
of every shade of selfishness and altruism were combined in the
culminating initiation of the onrush; the urge of trade, the
ardour of evangelization, the love of gain, the pride of
empire, the conscious trusteeship of civilization, the jealousies
of patriotism. Its continuance was inevitable from the moment
161

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

that contact was fully established between races so far apart in
the scale of progress.1
Those words, from the biography of the fifth Marquess of
Salisbury, the British prime minister to whom the major credit
for preventing the Partition of Africa from provoking a
European war is mostly due, go far to explain what has been
called ‘the most perplexing yet important problem in the world
today, the friction and conflict arising from the close contact
of two or more communities, each with differing patterns of
culture, within the same political entity’.2
As a matter of fact the vast inland territory which is now
Northern Rhodesia was not affected by the scramble at first. No
organized movement either of trade or evangelization reached it
at first. But ‘it was a tragic immunity. North of the Zambezi
these lands had long been a favoured hunting ground for Arab
slave raiders. Whole villages had been swept away - wide reaches
of territory had been depopulated - and it would be hard to fix
upon any spot in the habitable globe whose standards of well¬
being would not have borne favourable comparison with this
sanctuary of independence.’3 Lord Salisbury himself was anxious
for the two Rhodesias and Nyasaland to become an Imperial
Protectorate under the Foreign Office, ‘but the obstinate dislike
of the British Treasury to any further adventures which would
increase the responsibility and the yearly expenditure of Great
Britain’4 prevailed, and in 1891 the lands north of the Zambezi,
now Northern Rhodesia, were formally placed under Cecil
Rhodes’s Chartered Company.
At this time the four main warrior tribes which had invaded
the territory from the north-west and the south were all pretty

1.
2.
3.
4.

Lady Gwendolin Cecil, Life of Robert Marquess of Salisbury, Vol IV, p. 222.
E. Clegg, Race and Politics, p. 1.
op.cit., p. 240.
Sir Harry Johnston, History of the British Empire in Africa, p. 122.
162

APPENDIX

I

well established in the areas where their descendants are now
living. They were the Bemba, the Barotse, the Lunda, and the
Ngoni; the last-named having crossed the Zambezi as late as 1833.
Inter-tribal warfare was frequent, and the raiding of the smaller,
weaker tribes which surrounded them seems to have been in¬
cessant. The Arab slave-traders played their gruesome part, and
when they were not raiding on their own behalf, exchanged cloth
and guns for prisoners taken in war.
All four tribes are of Bantu origin, and in spite of many differ¬
ences with each other have much in common. Thus the Bemba
and the Barotse are matrilineal, and the Ngoni patrilineal, but
all have the same approach to land problems, holding that all
members of the tribe have the right to cultivate. All have similar
religious beliefs, a form of ancestor worship. None of the tribes
have a written language, all have a firm belief in magic and
witchcraft. Like all human beings they have a mixture of good
and bad qualities. Where perhaps the conditions under which
they have lived are most likely to produce conflict with the
Europeans with whom they come in contact is in their attitude
to continuous labour, which forms little or no part of their tribal
training. Dr Richards, in her monumental work, Land, Labour,
and Diet in Northern Rhodesia, calculates that under tribal con¬
ditions amongst the Bemba the necessary labour required to
maintain the community only occupies its members for about
seven months in any year.
To return to the early history of Northern Rhodesia, when
the territory came under the Chartered Company in 1891 it was
nominally administered by Sir Harry Johnston, Her Majesty’s
Commissioner for Nyasaland, but actually he was too much
occupied with suppressing the slave-trade in the latter country
to be able to spare time, or men, from his small force, which
consisted at first of only 70 Sikh soldiers from India, 80 Zanzi¬
baris, two gun-boats lent by the Admiralty, and a mission
steamer.
However, communications between Lakes Nyasa, Tanganyika,
163

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

and Mweru, were maintained, and small fortified stations con¬
structed at Abercorn, and Fort Rosebery. By 1896 the Yao slavers,
the Arabs, and the Ngoni in Nyasaland, had all been defeated,
and the company began to operate in Northern Rhodesia. The
Bemba had up till then been left severely alone, but the defeat
of the slavers in Nyasaland had cut off their supply of arms and
ammunition, and after a few minor engagements with the com¬
pany’s native police force, which was officered by Europeans,
they submitted. The defeat of the Ngoni in the Fort Jameson
district by troops from Nyasaland, and of Kasembe’s Lunda,
ended all hostilities in north-eastern Rhodesia. In north-western
Rhodesia Lewanika, King of the Barotse, who was anxious for
an ally against the Matabele, had signed the ‘Lochner Treaty’
as long ago as June 1890, and no fighting took place.1 By the
end of the nineteenth century Northern Rhodesia was effectively
pacified.
Two outstanding events have occurred in the present century
which have helped to make the Northern Rhodesia we know to¬
day. The first was the introduction of a Native Tax in 1900 in
north-eastern Rhodesia, and in 1904 in north-western Rhodesia.
The sum demanded from individuals was small, but the total
obtained was considerable, .£57,000 out of the total income of
Northern Rhodesia in 1910-11. Much more important from the
point of view of racial contacts, it was the imposition of this tax
which compelled the tribal African to leave his village and go
away to find work, sometimes as far off as Southern Rhodesia,
or South Africa. The effect of this needs no explaining or
emphasizing. The other happening occurred many years later,
and was the opening up of the Copperbelt as we know it today,
which began in 1928 and culminated in the Territory becoming
in 1953 the biggest producer of copper in the world. It is now
the third biggest. In 1958 the value of copper produced was
^70,141,287. The wages paid to Africans amounted to
,£6,318,573. During 1958 the mining industry provided employ1. L. H. Gann, Birth of a Plural Society, pp. 65-79.
t64

APPENDIX

I

ment for 7,350 Europeans and 39,780 Africans.1 These figures
speak for themselves.
Finally what has the political background been? For many
years after the pacification of Northern Rhodesia the government
of the country was entirely in the hands of European officials in
all respects. And even when the imperial government took over
from the Chartered Company in 1924, and replaced the settlers’
Advisory Council by a Legislative there was still an official
majority, and at the head of everything a Governor who was allpowerful in every respect. Africans had neither votes nor repre¬
sentatives. It is true that in 1929 an alleged form of indirect rule
was introduced for the tribal areas which was supposed to
strengthen the position of the Chiefs whom the Chartered Com¬
pany had entirely ignored. But at this very time the development
of the copper mines was drawing away thousands of Africans
from the rural areas, weakening the power of the Chiefs, and
destroying the very customs it was the intention of Government
to protect.
During the same period the Europeans, settlers and traders,
remained reasonably placid in the expectation that in due course
they would receive self-government on Southern Rhodesian lines.
But in 1930 Lord Passfield, the Labour Secretary of State, issued
a statement of Native Policy, based on the statement issued in
1922 by the Tories, which contained the words: ‘His Majesty’s
Government think it necessary definitely to record that the inter¬
ests of African Natives must be paramount, and that if and
when those interests and those of the immigrant races should
conflict, the former should prevail.’
From that moment onwards amalgamation with Southern
Rhodesia became the heartfelt desire of the great majority of un¬
official Europeans in Northern Rhodesia, until the day when Mr
Welensky, the leader of the Northern Rhodesian unofficials be¬
came convinced, in 1946, and in his turn convinced Sir Godfrey
Huggins, Prime Minister of Southern Rhodesia, that amalgama1. Handbook of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, pp. 64-5, 466-7.
!65

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

tion would never be permitted by either of the two main political
parties in Britain. Federation followed in due course, and at first
anyhow, it was supported by a good many people who thought,
and hoped, that, while avoiding the bad side of amalgamation,
it would have considerable economic and administrative
advantages.
African opposition to Federation was practically universal.
The mistrust of Southern Rhodesia had become by this time
almost pathological, and nothing in the way Federation was
presented helped in any respect to weaken this feeling, rather it
increased it.
Nevertheless in the pre-Federation years African political
advance had not been entirely negligible. It is only necessary
to chronicle the formation of African Provincial Councils, since
abolished without any reason being given, and the African
Representative Council, also now done away with (not to men¬
tion the fact that by the time Federation was seriously thought of
there were African members of Legislative Council), to realize
that there had been a marked change of attitude on the part of
many Europeans towards Africans which it would be unfair
entirely to discount.
So much for the past.
For the future one thing stands out, and that is that things have
got to change. Perhaps by the time this book is published they
will have changed.

Stewart Gore-Browne

APPENDIX II
MEMORANDUM
AND

OTHER

ON

THE

RACES

IN

REPRESENTATION
THE

FEDERATION

OF

AFRICANS

OF

RHODESIA

AND NYASALAND AND IN NORTHERN RHODESIA (1952)

The African people will accept nothing short of full adult fran166

APPENDIX

II

chise, with no reserved seats or other special safeguards for
minority groups, as the ultimate means of electing Legislative
Assemblies and Councils with sovereign authority in the Federa¬
tion and in Northern Rhodesia. They agree to advance to this by
steps that remain within the bounds of practice and constituted
politics, and progressively improve the representation of
Africans. Each step shall not be so long delayed that the adults
of today cannot foresee the ultimate realization of the ideal in
their own lifetime. Steps foreseen as temporarily acceptable are:
(i) Communal rolls with a fixed number of seats for each
racial group.
(ii) A common roll with reservation of a fixed minimum
number of seats for minority groups.
A balance of power in the hands of official members would be
acceptable in the early stages as long as there were Africans
among the officials.
The reform of the Territorial Constitution to be carried out
in 1958 is dealt with first.
Territorial Constitution.
The present distribution of seats in the Legislative Council is:
4 Africans (recommended to the Governor by the African Repre¬
sentative Council), 2 Europeans representing African Interests
(nominated by the Governor), 12 Elected members (Elected by
a roll of 12,000 European voters and about 3 Africans), 8 Official
members (ex officio or appointed by the Governor. All are
Europeans), making a total of 26. The Speaker is nominated.
Proposed redistribution of seats in 1958.
12 Africans (elected on separate African adult franchise roll),
12 elected by British subjects, 4 Official members (nominated by
the Governor), making a total of 28. The Speaker to be chosen by
the Members from outside the Council.
167

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Transitional Voters’ Roll.
The first electoral roll for Africans can be the Native Tax
Register. Every male taxpayer may obtain a vote to be cast by a
female voter until a register of African adult females is drawn
up. Any British subject or British Protected person may stand
for election by Africans. It is conceivable that corruption or in¬
efficiency may so damage the reputation of members that
Africans may wish to elect members of another race. This should
be allowed for in the constitution. The members elected by
British subjects shall be elected on the present voters’ rolls. No
African who is a British subject shall vote for a candidate
nominated as an African candidate.
Territorial Executive Council.
There are already 4 official members of the Executive Council
as well as the Governor who are all pledged to act without dis¬
crimination against Africans and it is useless to nominate another
European member to represent African interests, who has not the
confidence of the African people, but gives to a thoroughly un¬
democratic Council a pretended African representation. The only
thing acceptable to Africans is the nomination to the Executive
Council of the African members of the Legislative Council
chosen by all African members of the Legislative Council. There
shall be as many African members of the Executive Council as
there are unofficials elected by British subjects. Consideration
should be given to nominating African official members to the
Executive Council.
British Protected Persons.
Africans strongly object to the necessity of becoming British
subjects before they can become full citizens of their own
country. They consider it to be ridiculous that this extra citizen¬
ship should be made obligatory before they are given full voting
168

APPENDIX

II

rights. While they realize the benefit of membership of the
Commonwealth for their country, they believe that citizenship
of Northern Rhodesia should carry Commonwealth citizen
rights as it does in the Dominions and in Nigeria and the Gold
Coast. This conception of citizenship must be accepted by the
Government and then put into action by the formation of a
common voters’ roll based on adult franchise.
Common voters’ roll and reserved seats for minorities.
It is acceptable to Africans that a certain number of seats in
the Legislative Council shall be reserved for minority groups
during the first years of elections by a common voters’ roll. This
will give the minority groups a feeling of security. It is foreseen
that the political division of the people will not always be by race.
As an African class of wealthy property owners and high salaried
workers develops they will find their interests to be closer to those
of the European and Asian monied classes, while European and
Asian working men will see their interests allied to the African
workers. When no race any longer has reason to fear domination
by another race, the policy of reserved seats for minorities can
be ended and the Legislative Council will be a truly democratic
expression of the will of the majority of all citizens.
Reserved seats in the Legislative Council.
The system of reserved seats for minorities for a period
during the transition to full democratic representation will be
acceptable on the general principles laid down by W. J. M.
Mackenzie in his recommendations for Tanganyika as they may
be applied to a community with only two politically important
racial divisions.
Change from Communal roll to Common roll.
It would be acceptable to Africans that the system of electing
169

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

communal representatives on communal rolls should change to
that of common representation on a common roll when the
number of voters of each race are equal and the merging of the
communal rolls into a common roll would give parity to the
number of African voters and European (or British subject
voters). This might not be considered as providing sufficient
safeguard for the minorities if it came very soon, and a system of
reserved seats for minorities is put forward later to lessen their
fears.
Common roll with restricted franchise.
It has been strongly advocated by some who have the interests
of the African people at heart that communal rolls and com¬
munal representation are likely to hinder advance to a genuine
democracy. It is claimed by them that a common roll should be
established by the addition of Africans who have some income,
property or educational qualification.
If the franchise was extended to British Protected persons this
would not be unacceptable to Africans if the qualifications
were such that the number of Africans who could immediately
become eligible should be equal to the European voters or enough
to influence elections to a notable extent and that the administra¬
tion of the tests should be in impartial hands.
Educational tests.
At present, the educational test is that the voter wishing to
register should correctly fill in a form written in English
(Schedule i. Form A. of the Legislative Council Ordinance Cap.
2. of the Laws of Northern Rhodesia and Section 12). If this
form was available in the most widely spoken vernacular
languages of Northern Rhodesia, this test would be acceptable
to Africans for a transitional period.
Means Test.
The number of Africans occupying houses valued at £250 or
170

APPENDIX

II

more is increasing rapidly. If this test was administered impar¬
tially it would be acceptable to Africans for a transitional period.
(Cap. 2. Laws of Northern Rhodesia Section 11(a).) The income
required has been fixed at a point attained by very few Africans
but with the allowance of ^50 for rations or housing reducing
the requirements to ^150 a year or ^12 10 o a month the number
is increasing. Africans are afraid that European employers may
dismiss Africans before they have completed a year’s work at this
wage in order that they may be disenfranchised. If it was
sufficient to prove that _£i2 10 0 a month was earned in regular
employment for three months in any year and if all forms of
bonuses and additional emoluments were taken into con¬
sideration this test, administered impartially, would not be un¬
acceptable to Africans as a transitional measure. (Cap. 2. Laws of
Northern Rhodesia Section 11(c).)
Assessment and administration of tests.
A Board shall be established, if the formation of a common roll
on these terms shall be decided on, which shall have as many
Africans chosen by the African members of the Legislative
Council on it as there are Europeans, whose duty it shall be to
draw up and keep up to date the common electoral roll for the
Territory. Appeals from this Board shall be heard in the same way
as appeals from a Registering Office (Cap. 2. Laws of Northern
Rhodesia First Schedule Section 6).

African Representatives in the Legislative Council.
The representation of African interests by Europeans has been
made unacceptable to Africans by the record of the Europeans
nominated. They have not identified themselves with the people
they are supposed to represent. As they are not responsible to the
African people and do not depend on them for re-election, this
is not surprising. If African interests are to be represented by
171

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Europeans, they should be Europeans elected by Africans. This
also refers to representation on the Executive Council.
The Federal Assembly.
The African people wish to see the Federation, which was im¬
posed on them in spite of their unanimous opposition, dissolved
as soon as possible. Until this has been accomplished they wish
to see its constitution develop progressively towards true
democracy.
Representation in the Federal Assembly.
The present position is:
N. Rhodesia
Africans chosen
by Africans
i
Africans elected
by Europeans
Europeans
representing Africans
i
Elected by British
subjects
8
Total
Grand Total

Nyasaland

S. Rhodesia

ii
35

The total number of Africans eligible to vote as British sub¬
jects is under 500. There are over 50,000 European voters.
Recommendations are made for the number of seats allocated
to Nyasaland and Southern Rhodesian representatives because
the principles involved are common to all three Territories.
They are not necessarily accepted by Africans of those
Territories.
Proposed re-allocation of seats in the Federal Assembly.
The seats were allocated in the constitution of 1953 on the
basis of the importance of the European populations of the
172

APPENDIX

II

Territories and the financial influence of those Europeans.
This is unacceptable to Africans who can see no reason why
the three Territories should not have equal representation. The
influence of large European numbers in Southern Rhodesia
and their tenure of half the land area, is countered by the
influence of the great Northern Rhodesian copper industry and
by the greater African population of Nyasaland. These things
cannot be weighed and assessed with numerical accuracy. Parity
of representation is the only fair system. It is proposed that each
Territory sends 12 members to the Federal Assembly.
Representation of Africans in the Federal Assembly.
The common roll in Southern Rhodesia is an inoperative
force that accords no proper representation to Africans. Until
such time as the Southern Rhodesian common roll and common
rolls in Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland are political realities,
there should be communal representation for Africans for the
election of their own members.
Parity of Representation.
As a transitional measure, Africans would accept a Federal
Assembly consisting of 6 Africans and 6 Europeans (or persons
elected by the British subjects) for each Territory.
Proposal.
N. Rhodesia

Nyasaland

6

6

6

6

6

6

Total

12

12

12

Grand Total

36

Elected by
African Roll
Elected by Europeans
or British subjects

m

S. Rhodesia

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Reserved Seats in Southern Rhodesia.
If it is thought inadvisable to split the common roll of
Southern Rhodesia, the election could be carried on on the basis
of six reserved seats for those African candidates who obtained
most votes. It is realized that this system perpetuates the present
indefensible system whereby representatives of Africans are
elected by a roll on which there is an overwhelming number of
Europeans, and that African candidates if they are to have any
chance of success have to obtain the endorsement of a European
political party. The alternative is put forward here because
Southern Rhodesian political organizations may prefer to fight
for a fairer common roll than for a transitional period with
communal rolls. This does not by any means suggest a separate
communal roll system in Southern Rhodesia which does not now
exist.
The African Affairs Board.
The African Affairs Board has not been an effective check on
discriminating legislation in the Federation. The Income Tax
Act which made the Africans of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland liable for income tax for the first time without relieving
them of Territorial Native Tax, and the Cadet Corps Act which
excluded Africans by implication from its scope, passed un¬
opposed. This was not unexpected as the numbers of Africans
and Europeans on the Board was equal while the Chairman was,
and still is, a European nominated by a Governor and not chosen
by Africans. The African Affairs Board should be altered so that
Africans representing African interests alone remain on it and
those chosen by Africans (and not as in Southern Rhodesia by a
European electorate) shall be in a majority. The GovernorGeneral should be instructed to appoint a Secretary to the Board
whose duty it would be to point out to the members any point
in proposed legislation that might in any way come within the
scope of its constitutional powers. It is suggested that the Secre¬
tary should be an African from outside the Board.

APPENDIX

II

Democratic Government the Ultimate Aim.
Any move towards Dominion status or government in¬
dependent of the United Kingdom is opposed without reserve
by all Africans. In putting forward this memorandum as a
declaration of a policy acceptable to the African people of
Northern Rhodesia, it is necessary to repeat that each step pro¬
posed is acceptable only in that it leads towards the democratic
government of Northern Rhodesia as a Territory and, so long as
the present Federal constitution is effective, as part of the Federa¬
tion. Africans have no power to bring about the change they ask
for by constitutional means, as they are excluded from the
franchise and are inadequately represented in the councils and
assemblies. The Secretary of State is reminded that he can use
his official votes in the Executive and Legislative Councils of
Northern Rhodesia to bring about the changes asked for by
Africans. If he does not do so the responsibility of driving
Africans, in their fear and despair, to take unconstitutional steps
to amend the constitution will rest with him.
In Federal matters, the constitution so strongly endorsed by a
Conservative government makes direct action by the government
of the United Kingdom almost impossible. The government of
the United Kingdom will be, under Article 99 of the Federal
constitution, a party to the conference to be convened between
i960 and 1962 to consider amendments to the constitution. With
the control of the Territorial delegations from Northern Rhodesia
and Nyasaland the United Kingdom can exert very strong
pressure at this conference. The Secretary of State is requested to
show now that he will be prepared at the conference to use his
influence to effect amendments to the constitution that will give
more fair play to Africans. In that way he may be able to lessen
the great anxiety and bitterness of the African people, and render
unnecessary action beyond the scope of the constitution to which
they might be driven if all hope of reassurance was lost.
The demands for a united government, Dominion status and
!75

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

apartheid by European settlers are wholly unacceptable to
Africans and any tendency by the United Kingdom government
to give way to any one of these demands will be met with opposi¬
tion which may break into unpleasant happenings.

APPENDIX III
COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSALS FOR CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE IN
NORTHERN RHODESIA (1958)

Historical
1 We wish to remind the British Government that our lands and
people were entrusted by agreement with our forbears to the
protection of Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom.
2 Northern Rhodesia came under the administration of the British
Government in 1924 when it was declared a Protectorate by the
Crown. Although the official policy was that of paramountcy of
African interests, the protected persons were not represented at
all in the Legislative Council for twenty-one years, yet the hand¬
ful of Europeans who were then in the country were given
adequate representation right away.
3 Africans were represented for the first time in 1938 indirectly
when a European member was nominated by the Governor to
represent them. At this time, there were 16 members in the
Legislative Council which was made up as follows:
Official members (including the Governor as President
of the Council). 8
Unofficial members representing Europeans only. 7
A European nominated to represent African interests. 1
16

176

APPENDIX

III

4 It was not until 1948 that Africans had some kind of ‘direct’
representation when 2 African members were appointed to the
Legislative Council in addition to 2 Europeans nominated to
represent African interests.
5 On the other hand, there was a corresponding increase of one
in the official representation and two elected European members.
The result of this was that the number of elected European
members was equal for the first time to that of Official members,
making the composition of the Legislative Council thus:
Official members (all white). 10
Unofficial members (representing the white settler
element . 10
White nominees to represent Africans.
2
Appointed African members. 2
24

6 The next stage in this development came in 1954 when the
number of appointed African representatives was increased to
four with another corresponding increase in European representa¬
tion and also a reduction in official representation, thus giving
the vocal white settler element a majority in the Council, as shown
below:
Official members (all white).
Unofficial members (representing the white settler

8

element . 12
White nominees to represent Africans.
2
Appointed African members. 4
26

7 Sight must not be lost of the fact mentioned above that para-

177

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

mountcy of African interests was the official policy of Northern
Rhodesia from 1924. This meant that when and if the interests
of the Africans conflicted with those of the immigrant races, the
interests of the Africans would prevail. This was a thorn in the
flesh of the white settlers because on major issues the Colonial
Office were prone to listen more to the Africans than to the
settlers. A case in point was the insistent demand by the settlers
to amalgamate the Rhodesias, which was turned down several
times until the policy of African paramountcy was changed.
8 It must be placed on record that there was absolute treachery
in the replacement of the policy of paramountcy of African in¬
terests by the woolly one of partnership. When this change took
place, the consent of the Chiefs and their people was not even
sought. Instead, in 1948 two hand-picked Africans were flown to
London in the company of top Government officials and elected
European representatives to dismantle the policy of African Para¬
mountcy.
9 The so-called partnership policy remained undefined until 1954
when the Moffat Resolutions were passed in the Legislative
Council. The first indication as to the meaning of ‘Partnership’
as conceived by the European representatives was when Mr Roy
Welensky, leader of the white settler representatives, said in the
Legislative Council in 1952, during the debate on the Federal
Scheme, that not all partnerships were ‘fifty-fifty’, thus replacing
the old paramountcy policy by one of European paramountcy.
10 Up to now the jealously guarded Executive Council has been
the prerogative of the Government officials and European repre¬
sentatives. Since 1948, one of the white nominees representing
African interests has been sitting in the Council, but it was not
until 1954 that a portfolio was offered to him. It must be recorded
here that these so-called African representatives have never had
the confidence of the Africans.

178

APPENDIX

III

Principles of Constitutional Change
11 We appreciate the principle contained in Para. 16 of the
White Paper that ‘Political parties should begin to develop on
non-racial lines and that politics should cut straight across race’.
Government say that they have consistently followed this policy
and they believe that this policy has always been generally
accepted by the people in Northern Rhodesia. Government have
supported this line of policy by quoting the Moffat Resolutions.
The relevant Resolutions are (i) and (2) which read:
(1) The objective of policy in Northern Rhodesia must be
to remove from each race the fear that the other might
dominate for its own racial benefit and to move forward
from the present system of racial representation in the
territorial legislature towards a franchise with no separate
representation for the races.
(ii) Until that objective can be fully achieved a period of
transition will remain during which special arrangements
in the Legislative and Executive Councils must continue
to be made so as to ensure that no race can use either the
preponderance of its members or its more advanced stage
of development to dominate the other for its own racial
benefit.
12 The following extract from the Moffat Resolutions demands
special attention: ‘That no race can use either the preponderance
of its numbers or its more advanced stage of development to
dominate the other for its own racial benefit’. It would appear
from this that the best solution to our constitutional problem
now would be parity of representation in the Legislative Council
between Africans and Europeans. Government, however, who
are themselves committed to the Moffat Resolutions argue in the
White Paper that parity of representation between the races
‘could not but consolidate and perpetuate a racial outlook’.
13 Using that argument Government have gone on to make pro179

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

posals which are almost identical with the recommendations of
the United Federal Party which give the European minority in
this country a big majority over African members. It is quite
safe to assume from this that the reason given by the Govern¬
ment against parity is a false one intended to support the Govern¬
ment case for proposing a constitution which gives the Europeans
control of Government because of their ‘more advanced stage of
development to dominate over the Africans for their own racial
benefit’.
14 It must be noted that whereas His Excellency started having
constitutional discussions early in 1957 with individual members
and groups of members of the Legislative Council and others, it
was not until February 1958 that he met the leaders of the African
National Congress. It is quite evident that when His Excellency
met Congress leaders he had already irrevocably committed him¬
self to accepting almost in toto the proposals of the settlers.
15 We note the Government’s desire that ‘the constitutional
arrangements should ensure that the government of the country
will continue to rest in the hands of responsible men, men with
understanding and of sufficient education and experience of
affairs to be able to reason and to exercise judgment between
alternative courses of action’. So much depends on the definition
of the word ‘responsible’! As could be instanced from the White
Paper, a ‘responsible’ person may be only a rich man with a
knowledge of advanced English !
16 Government wishes that ‘the electoral system must encourage
the return of men or women who are prepared and indeed dis¬
posed to consider and balance the interests of all racial groups,
and who are prompted primarily by a spirit of public service
to the whole community’. To get these men the White Paper
proposes to set the qualification for franchise so high that the
mass of Africans will not be able to qualify, thus defeating
Government’s own objective ‘that no one race can use either
the preponderance of its numbers or its more advanced stage of
development’.
180

APPENDIX

III

17 Government intends to discourage the return of extremists
who, it claims, would look to sectional interests. It is no secret
that in Government circles extremists are either Dominion Party
followers or African National Congress members. There is
nothing to bar Dominion Party followers from either qualifying
as voters or standing as candidates. On the other hand, the
majority of Africans would be left without a vote because
Government fears that if a substantial number of them were
enfranchised they would be misused by the so-called extremists.
18 Government would like to label the African National Con¬
gress extremist. It goes without saying that Congress represents
ninety-nine per cent of the African political opinion which
means, therefore, that all Congress members are extremists and
therefore most Africans are extremists. If and when extremism
becomes a common character trait, then it ceases to be extrem¬
ism. Therefore, whether they like it or not, Government must
enfranchise the Africans as they must have people of their own
political thought to represent them in the Legislative Council,
and the Executive Council for that matter.
19 Government proposes to ‘give the vote to those who are con¬
tributing to the wealth and welfare of the country and who
are capable of exercising it with judgment and public spirit’.
Judging from Government’s definition of a responsible person re¬
ferred to above, it follows here that when they propose to limit
the franchise to people who are contributing to the wealth and
welfare of the country and others, they mean the European
settlers in this country.
20 We contend that the African contributes much more than his
white boss. The African has contributed blood on the battlefield
in defence of the British Empire; the African has contributed to
the wealth of this country by providing cheap labour and by pay¬
ing poll tax and other forms of taxation, direct or indirect and
now including income tax. Over and above that the African has
provided the land.
21 In view of all this, we believe the African has a strong case
181

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

for demanding a much better franchise than the one proposed.
In our opinion, and in the name of democracy, it should be
universal adult franchise based on one man one vote.
22 Government have rejected the concept of universal adult suf¬
frage as unsuitable for Northern Rhodesia, simply because the
Tredgold Franchise Commission rejected it as unsuitable for
Southern Rhodesia.
23 By refusing the Congress proposal of universal adult suffrage
based on one man one vote and adopting the Tredgold Com¬
mission recommendations on Southern Rhodesia, it does reveal
the idea behind the scheme. It is now quite obvious that the
Secretary of State wishes to see a complete constitutional link
between the two Rhodesias with a view to bringing about
amalgamation of the Rhodesias probably in i960 when the
Federal Constitution comes up for review.
24 The Federal Constitution says that there shall not be amalga¬
mation at any future time but it can now be seen that the
entrenched clause is de facto being flouted.
25 This shows just how meaningless British guarantees and
promises are, however entrenched they may be. If this is the
plot of the Colonial Office against the Africans in Northern
Rhodesia we can only say this, that we are heading for disaster.
26 In the White Paper the seats in the Legislative Council are
divided between black and white and there can be no question
whatsoever of Africans swamping Europeans.
27 We do not agree that the best way to give Africans a proper
measure of representation in the House would be to adopt
a qualitative franchise. On the contrary, we believe that the
best way to do this would be to give parity of representation
in the House as well as universal adult franchise based on one
MAN ONE VOTE.

28 While we are diametrically opposed to any form of a quali¬
tative franchise we must make these remarks in passing. Govern¬
ment have proposed to award the vote to educated Chiefs on
their own right and also to educated headmen, hereditary
182

APPENDIX

III

councillors, pensioners and ministers of religion.
29 There are 853 Chiefs and important headmen in Northern
Rhodesia, and from a personal knowledge of most of them we
estimate that of these not more than 100 would be likely to
qualify. The rest who have not got the necessary literacy qualifica¬
tion would not.
30 Another point for Government to note is that it is not money
that makes a responsible person. Government have, by awarding
the Chiefs the vote, agreed that the Chiefs, despite their poverty,
do responsible work. It is, therefore, not fair to exclude a person
from voting simply because he does not have the means qualifica¬
tion.
Congress Proposals
31 We agree with Government when they say that Northern
Rhodesia has not yet advanced to the stage where the colour of
their members is of no concern of the electorate, whether that
electorate be predominantly black or white. We note also that
Government does realize that however much they may wish to
have non-racial representation it is just not feasible and shall
never be in a society like ours under the present set-up. Indeed,
however much they may wish to have non-racial representation
it is just not feasible and shall never be in a society like ours under
the present set-up. Indeed, however much we kid ourselves in
terms of non-racialism, none of us shall forget the shade of his
skin.
32 However, during the transitory period i.e., from now to 1964,
we commend this scheme to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, for his consideration:
A Speaker appointed by the Governor, 35 Elected Members, 21
Elected Africans, 14 Elected Europeans and 7 Nominated
Officials, making 21 African Members and 21 European
Members.
33 As regards the Executive Council, the African National Con183

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

gress proposes: the Governor as President, 3 African Elected
Members, 3 European Elected Members and 3 European
Officials. This gives the Europeans a majority of 7 in the
Executive Council.
34 While it may be true that the bulk of the African population
resides in the rural areas covered by the six special constituencies
it is a fact that along the line of rail where Africans are only
given two representatives there are, according to the alleged
figures quoted in Appendix B of the White Paper, 17,295 prob¬
able voters as against 7,353 in the rural areas.
35 It is therefore completely illogical to give 7,353 voters six
representatives and 17,295 voters only two, just because they
happen to live in the ‘Ordinary’ 12 constituencies where the in¬
terests of the Europeans are predominant.
36 It is quite true, however, that the bulk of Europeans reside
along the line of rail and this is borne out by the figures quoted
in the White Paper.
37 It is provided that every ‘special’ candidate standing for elec¬
tion should be required to obtain a certificate from two-thirds of
the Chiefs recognized by the Governor in his constituency that
those Chiefs have no objection to his standing as a candidate. The
certificate, it is proposed, should be signed in the presence of wit¬
nesses duly appointed by the Governor.
38 Government believes that because local government in the
towns is already closely linked with the territorial centre of
Government and the Legislative Council, a similar link should
be forged between the Legislative Council and the Native
Authorities in the rural areas. They propose most strangely that
the best way to do this is by using the above ridiculous method.
39 In fact, this method does not bear any semblance at all to the
link the Municipalities have with Central Government. A similar
link would be to propose that every European candidate in an
Ordinary constituency should obtain a certificate signed in the
presence of a number of witnesses duly appointed by the
Governor, from two-thirds of the municipal councillors in his
184

APPENDIX

III

constituency that those councillors had no objection to his stand¬
ing as a candidate - imagining that all such councillors held
remunerative office under the Crown.
40 There are three main reasons against this proposal. The first
is that this proposal if adopted can quite easily be misused by
Chiefs and the witnesses appointed by the Governor. While we
have no idea as to what type of people will be nominated as
witnesses, it is quite possible that Chiefs and the witnesses might
belong to certain political parties. Party loyalty could easily make
these people fail to execute their work without bias.
41 The second reason against this proposal is that it discriminates
against African candidates standing for special constituencies and
makes their initial work very difficult.
42 The final and most important reason against this proposal is
that, if passed, it wall give the Governor power to dictate who to
nominate for election to the Legislative Council.
43 This is a most wicked provision which has no parallel in any
known democratic country. To accept this would be tanta¬
mount to accepting direct dictatorship and despotism.
44 In conclusion, the African National Congress would like to
draw the attention of the Secretary of State for the Colonies to
the fact that the African National Congress plan for parity of
representation is more than supported by the Government’s own
figures in Appendix B of the White Paper.
45 It is noted that the 18,886 Ordinary voters in the 12 Con¬
stituencies along the line of rail have 12 European representatives.
On that basis the 17,295 special voters on the line of rail have a
legitimate claim for 11 representatives.
46 On the other hand, the 1,126 Ordinary voters in the rural areas
of the Protectorate have been offered two representatives. Work¬
ing on the same proportion of representation again, the 7,353
mainly African voters are entitled to 13 representatives instead
of the 6 as proposed by Government.
47 On that basis there would be 24 African members in the Legis185

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

lative Council as against the 21 the African Congress has asked
for.
H. M. Nkumbula.
K. D. Kaunda.
National President.
National Secretary.
For, and on behalf of, The National Executive Council of the
African National Congress of Northern Rhodesia.
APPENDIX IV
REPORT ON THE DISTURBANCES IN GWEMBE VALLEY, PRESENTED
TO THE AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS ON 14 DECEMBER I953

(Unedited, to preserve authenticity)
For many years the people in the Gwembe Valley and district
have been suffering from Government oppressive laws. These
disturbances were more accentuated with the introduction of the
African National Congress in the area.
In the month of May 1953 there came strangers at Chief
Simamba’s village. These men were Mr Simon Mambo (District
Organizing Secretary for African National Congress) and another
man whose name we do not know. The Chief sent out his
Kapasus or Messengers to tell all the people that on the follow¬
ing day there would be a meeting. All the people in the Chief’s
area went to the meeting on the appointed day, and we were
also there. Whilst the messengers were spreading the news about
this meeting, at Siakumbeni’s village they found a man of the
Gwembe Native Authority to visit them. When he saw that
people were rejoicing, he queried what they hoped the Congress
would do for them. The people answered that they were only
glad because Congress men had come to their area to see for
themselves and from their lips they could hear the deplorable
conditions under which they lived. This was considered an in¬
sult and a man and his mother were instantly arrested and hand¬
cuffed.
At the meeting Mr Simon Mambo started by saying, ‘The
186

APPENDIX

IV

Europeans usually tell us that there is freedom in this country;
yet there is no freedom. A man and his mother were arrested
yesterday because of saying that they were glad to hear that Con¬
gress members were in this part of the country - there is then
no freedom of speech. We, the Africans, are troubling other
Africans. But if we unite in the name of the Northern Rhodesia
African Congress, trouble would be less because every man
would know what was wrong and what was right towards his
fellow men.’
Mr Mambo asked Chief Simamba what was worrying them
most. The Chief said: (i) compulsory planting of cassava, and
not being allowed to eat same before Government says so; and
(ii) Nzembwe or collective storage of kaffir corn leaving some
families starving; and (iii) compulsory digging of rubbish or
refuse pits; and (iv) forced labour recruitment. Mr Mambo then
asked the Chief (Simamba) whether Congress is acceptable. The
Chief asked what was Congress? Mr Mambo said that Congress
was the political unity of all the people so that if possible they
might find a way out of some of the illegitimate and unnecessary
sufferings, a way out of slavery, a way to peace. ‘At present, any
day the District Commissioner likes, a Chief may be deposed
from his birth-right of Chieftainship.’ Chief Simamba said that
Congress was acceptable. Mr Mambo then said, ‘My brethren,
our organization needs money. If this great task is to be carried
out, those of you who have accepted can come forward and
donate money.’ Chief Simamba was the first to donate two
pounds and ten shillings (£2 10 0). Then the Chief told (us)
his people to donate also for he had himself donated. Then the
village Headmen started donating. Each according to his wish
from 2/- to 5/- per person. Then we also started donating, each
man a shilling (1/-). All of us who donated received receipts.
After this, we all sat down and the meeting continued. Mr
Simon Mambo asked if amongst ourselves there was anybody
who could write so that he could be a secretary to enrol new
members and receive donations from members of the comG

187

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

munity. So people were elected for this work and these are their
names: Chief Simamba, Siakumbila, a Chief’s Councillor,
Kwaipa, Mateyo, all of these four members were elected office¬
bearers for southern area. The others were Tebulu, and one other
for the south-western area. These collected the money and put it
together and this is the money which was taken to a Congress
meeting at Chongo in the month of May.
On their return, the people who attended the Chongo meeting
told us of the deliberations of that Conference but were sorry to
hear that Chief Simamba after attending for a day went to attend
a Government meeting at Mazabuka. We were also asked to
donate more money. All the people or most of them donated,
and this money was handed to Congress at a meeting held at
Changa in Chief Sinadambwe’s area. Mr Harry Nkumbula was
there.
We told Mr Nkumbula of our sufferings, especially the forced
cheap labour recruitment, forced planting of cassava ‘which we
are not being allowed to eat’. He (Mr Nkumbula) said that he
did not know that the law of this country could allow that
kind of human torture, and that when he returned to town he
would interview some big Government Officials and ask if they
knew that such a thing was going on in the Gwembe District.
We went back to our villages after the meeting. We stayed peace¬
fully for only one month and after that there came two Boma
Messengers and one Kapasu from the Native Authority. They
started arresting people for forced cheap labour, but at our
villages we refused and no one was taken at that time. Then the
Messengers talked about Nzembwe (collective storage of food),
then the people refused (pele bantu ba\a\ci) because of starvation
after a family has put all their food into Nzembwe. And they did
so because if anyone failed to bring food for such kind of storage
he was to be arrested and fined at the Chief’s Court. Chief
Simamba said, ‘It is Harry Nkumbula who had stopped you from
obeying this order’.
After that the party left for Siakumbeni’s village where they
188

APPENDIX

IV

slept. There we heard that they talked of the same matter but
the Headman and his people refused to be bluffed by the
Messengers, and there were no more people to be arrested for
forced labour for most of them had already been arrested in the
past few days. Then on the following day the Messengers left for
Chafukwa’s village. They asked Headman Chafukwa to accom¬
pany them to Chief Simamba’s village, on account of his few
remaining peoples’ refusal to go for forced labour and disobeying
Nzembwe Orders or Regulations passed by the Native Authority.
The Headman refused. Then they told him that it was not he
whom they wanted. They said that they had come specially for
‘this Congress member’ - pointing at Simon.
Simon said: ‘They asked for my Situpa (Identification Certifi¬
cate), but I declined to give them this because they did not tell me
what my charge was. Chief Simamba was also present, three other
village-mates and I were handcuffed at the spot and were told that
we were to be taken away for (Chibalo) forced labour. We were at
first taken to Chief Simamba’s village, and were handcuffed as
we followed the party round about in the villages where the
party was still looking for other people. The Headmen of our
villages followed us on the following day. We were going to¬
wards the concentration camps when we met these Headmen on
the way. The Headmen asked the Messengers what offence we
had committed so as to be handcuffed. The Headmen asked them
if at all we had not paid our Poll Tax. The Messengers failed to
give an answer, and instead they handed over the keys to the
Headmen so that they could unlock the handcuffs and gave us
our Situpas and said to the Headmen, “There are your men”.
There was no trouble. All was said and done amicably and with¬
out violence. We went back to our villages and stayed peacefully
without trouble for at least one month. After that the District
Commissioner came with his four Messengers and asked where
Headman Chafukwa was. They ordered me to sit down and
asked me to clap hands for them. I did all what they ordered me
to do and likewise I was ordered to take him to Chilimanzi’s
189

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

village.’
Headman Chilimanzi stated: ‘When they arrived, they ordered
six of us to sit down and to stretch our legs, and later ordered us
to clap our hands. We did as ordered for we were told that that
was the kind of an honour a white man ought to be given. After
that we were taken to our cassava gardens and when we reached
the gate of the fence of the gardens we were again told to sit
down and stretch our legs as we did in the village and to
clap our hands for the District Commissioner. We did as ordered
and instructed. Some of the cassava had been eaten. We were
asked as to who ate the cassava. We answered and said that
monkeys eat the cassava for they raided the gardens every day.
The interpreters were Chief Simamba himself and Head
Messenger Chimputu. They said that it was Harry Nkumbula
who has told the monkeys to eat the cassava. But I said that
long before we heard of Harry Nkumbula from other people,
monkeys have been raiding our gardens, and I for one usually
buy cassava from other people to plant or replace those eaten by
monkeys. Chief Simamba said that I was telling a lie, and that
I had eaten the cassava. But I said that I certainly was not a
monkey. After that we were all taken to Chafukwa’s village
where together with people at Chafukwa’s village we were told
to sit down and to clap hands for the white man, and we did so.
Then the District Commissioner through an interpreter spoke
and asked Simon as to who had eaten the cassava.’
Simon stated: ‘I said that it was the monkeys that ate it. Then
the District Commissioner asked me and said, “Have the mon¬
keys got hoes?”. And I said that the hoes were used at the time
of planting the cassava. Then Chief Simamba said: “You should
not eat cassava any more for you have already accepted the
African Congress of Harry Nkumbula.’ Then we were told to
stand up and go back to the village. We were not allowed to enter
the village. We were shown where to go by the point (indication)
of a finger towards the road where a Government lorry awaited
for us.’
190

APPENDIX

IV

Headman Chilimanzi stated: ‘I asked what the lorry had to
do with us for if you have come to see cassava, you should go
round all the villages and see what the monkeys have done with
the cassava. I was then held by the head and violently pushed
towards the lorry. They encircled us and pushed us to the
lorry. I could not tolerate it for I had a wound on my right shin,
so I asked what crime we had committed which made them to
push us as they did. I was shouted at with an insult, “You will
be beaten today.” Seeing that the people who wanted to beat us
had four rifles with them we wondered what kind of beating
that would be and, therefore, we scattered and ran away. Then
they returned in the village of Chafukwa. Chief Simamba
warned the women in the village saying, “Your husbands who
have joined the Congress should be careful for the Government
is determined to torture them until they can denounce Congress.”
Then in the ears of the women who were in the village, through
an interpreter, a Messenger, the District Commissioner and the
Chief talked of the possibility of bringing down Police manage¬
ment and soldiers “to fix these people”. They left Chafukwa’s
village and went easterly to Simangilile; on the way they met a
man herding goats. His name is Chisenga the deputy to Head¬
man Simangilile. They called for him and when he was come
they ordered him to sit down and when he was sat they sur¬
rounded him. Chief Simamba said to him, “This is the new
District Commissioner, so clap your hands for him.” After clap¬
ping his hands he was ordered to mount on to the lorry. He
asked what he was going to do up in the lorry. They got hold of
him and handled him firmly into the lorry and drove off towards
Chief Simamba’s village. On the way, they met a man on a
push bicycle and Chisenga asked this man to convey the message
to Simangilile’s village to go and tell his people that they had
stolen him by a white man. When the villagers heard about it
they went to Simamba’s village to find out. They found that
another man was also arrested. His name is Headman Chingwemyuka. Chief Simamba was looking after them because the

191

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

District Commissioner had gone to Chirundu Road. The people
waited for the District Commissioner until they were so hungry
so that they left for their villages; together with them were the
two alleged culprits. When the District Commissioner returned
from the Chirundu Road on the following day, he asked the
Chief where the two arrested people were. He was told that they
had gone back to their homes. Then the District Commissioner
went back to Gwembe Boma.
‘After one week there came four lorries full of African Con¬
stables with but three Europeans, together with the District
Commissioner. When they reached Simangilile’s village, they
started chasing after women. They found six women with
baskets of kaffir com on their heads and this was spilt when
they tried to rescue themselves from this sudden and unexpected
attack by policemen they had never seen before. But they were
arrested or captured. When the boys who were herding goats
saw that, they ran to the river and when the men started home¬
wards to see what had happened, on the way they met this gang
of policemen armed with rifles chasing for them. The men
started running away. Chisenga particularly continued to run up
to the river when he was told that if he would swim across they
would fire at him. Therefore he returned towards them and was
arrested and handcuffed, and they took him to Chief Simamba.
‘When we heard of it all the people of the village on our side
gathered together so that the “Impi” of policemen should
find us together in the village. On the day that followed at
about nine o’clock, the Messengers and Constables were armed
with rifles and sticks; when they gave a sound of alarm, we
realized what was coming on us and we all ran away. We were
followed. The Messenger who was very cross and running after
us asked why we were running away. We told him that we were
afraid “because you have come well-armed and staged a war
on us, though unarmed as we are. You have come with many
policemen with rifles and it can never be anything less than
war.” The District Commissioner sent a Messenger to inform
192

APPENDIX

IV

us that he had come with policemen and rifles to show us that
“the Government has power to kill you if you refuse Government
laws We said that we did not want the District Commissioner
and the policemen to come near to us for he had come to fight
us. Then he sent the Messenger for the second time to tell us
that the District Commissioner was prepared to hide the police¬
men somewhere while he would be talking to us. We agreed to
this but we were suspicious of being trapped and killed by the
hidden policemen while we talked with the District Commis¬
sioner. But when we saw how he pleaded and persuaded us for
quite a while, we decided to meet him. When we met him, he
talked to us through Messenger Chimpuku’s interpretation say¬
ing that he had come with the armed police to show us “Govern¬
ment has power to force anybody to obey Government laws
however bad or good they may be. The Congress members are
not allowed in Gwembe area now because they have made the
people to reason and that’s why we have banned them to appear
in this area. Anybody who will be found to be a Congress mem¬
ber will be arrested.”
‘We replied that “although you have banned Congress these
laws have for long been unjust to us - and for such a long time
for which we are not prepared to follow these-forced cheap
labour, compulsory Nzembwe storage and cassava planting”.
Then the District Commissioner and the policemen returned
back to Gwembe Boma.
‘After four days, there came eight lorries and one jeep all full
of policemen armed with rifles. We were sent for and all the
people in Chief Simamba’s area went there. The District Com¬
missioner talked and said that he had brought this battalion to
us to demonstrate and show how the Government was so power¬
ful and what would befall those who resist Government Regula¬
tions however bad. “If you refuse to obey, you will perish of
guns,” he continued. “The Government knows that there are
such laws as forced labour, Nzembwe and compulsory cassava
plantation and its accompaniments. If you think I am lying to

m

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

you, here is the District Commissioner from Lusaka who will
confirm my statement.” Then the so-called District Commis¬
sioner from Lusaka said that we all know about these laws.
‘We told them that “we are against cassava plantation because
if the monkeys eat the cassava we are to be fined six pounds
(£6 o o). And if anyone refused to go for the forced cheap labour
he is sent to prison.”
‘The District Commissioner said that “Congress has no right
to tell you what is a bad law or a good law, therefore you should
obey all the laws”. We told him that we had already accepted
the Congress, “for in other areas although there is Congress, or
no Congress, there is no more forced labour, and we are deter¬
mined to remain Congress members”.
‘After the meeting, he told us that he would be coming to our
homes on the following day. On that appointed day, we were
gathered in Chilimanzi’s village and the District Commissioner
came with the other said District Commissioner from Lusaka,
the Head Messenger and a Boma Clerk who interpreted for him
and he asked what we thought about these things. We told him
that we wanted that the Government should be buying food
from us so that in the time of hunger, those who happen to
starve could buy the food from the Government, and that we
were not prepared to be forced for cheap labour. But he only
asked us as to who had given us such a sense of reasoning. We
told him that it was because of suffering for many years which
we have seen ourselves. Then he asked to find out who were the
Congress members, but nobody came forward. Then he said he
would look for them for that was why he had brought the police
with him. He said he knew why we were talking as we did
because of the meeting we had at Changa with Mr Nkumbula.
‘For that reason, he said that this year he would make sure
that we would not cultivate our gardens, because he would be raid¬
ing our villages and arresting the people for forced labour. How¬
ever much we might hide he would bring enough policemen to
look for us in our gardens for either forced labour or prison.
194

APPENDIX

IV

‘On the following day the District Commissioner came again
with the Chief and the Chief told us “I am telling you what the
District Commissioner has told me to tell you and that is that
Congress is an organization of fools and I do not want it”. We
told the District Commissioner that the Chief thinks Congress
is no good because nobody forces him for cheap labour, but we
say that we like the African National Congress. The District
Commissioner and the Chief Simamba said that Congress mem¬
bers should be sent to jail.
‘After this, there passed only one week before the police came
and arrested twenty-one men of Simangilile’s village. They were
arrested at night. From that time up to this time, people do not
sleep in their houses. They do not cultivate for fear of un¬
expected arrest.
‘For this reason, and although the rain has come, we cannot
cultivate our gardens for fear of being arrested, and, on our
hearing that Congress members may not come because of the
ban from entering Gwembe Valley, we have come to let you
know of the torture in our land which you might not know of.
And also to ask if it is possible for us to interview some big
Government Officials who just hear that people in Gwembe are
bad, that if they hear from us the true facts, they may be per¬
suaded to think otherwise and try to rectify the conditions at
home. The Government has stopped us from cultivating in
Gwembe because of the reasons already given and there is a
danger of a famine in the coming year.
‘When we complain about bad conditions to our Chief, he
threatens and warns us of being sent to jail so we are afraid.
‘That is all we have got to say.
‘We are,
Headman Chilimanzi. Headman Chatugwa. Manyengela.
Simon Siavima. Edward Simunyama. Samson Simamba.
Mackison Sibakwi. Samuel Magayi Chafukwa.’
On 18 December, four days after the report was presented to
Congress, I wrote to the Secretary for Native Affairs, Lusaka:

m

ZAMBIA

SHALL

BE

FREE

Re: GWEMBE DISTURBANCES
Sir,
With reference to our conversation this morning, I must say
how sorry we are for your refusal to have an interview with us
on the above subject.
You are aware, as I pointed out to you, that the Government
has made certain allegations against the Congress about the
Gwembe incident and it is my duty to clear up the situation.
I told you there are at my office here in Lusaka eight men who
have fled away from the bad Native Administration under some
of your Officers which is rife there. These men desired to see you
in person and air their grievances to you as the head of the
Native Affairs. It is most regrettable that you offer these people
no opportunity of seeing you.
As you will notice from the enclosed narrative of their prob¬
lems it is out of the question to ask them to see their District
Commissioner. They simply wouldn’t go near him. They fear
him because of the things he has done to them. Let us hope for
God’s sake that these poor people will not be tortured the more
for looking up to Congress in their difficult times when they go
back to their homes.
I must here affirm in the strongest terms that this African
National Congress has nothing to do with the Gwembe disturb¬
ances. The mismanagement of their affairs by your Department
has led to the trouble. We, as Congress, would not accept any
blame by Government because of its own maladministration.
We have pledged ourselves to a policy of non-co-operation in
matters detrimental to African interests, without violence. This
we mean to follow up to a point where it shall prove beneficial
to the people concerned.
I am,
Sir
Yours faithfully,
K. D. Kaunda
196

Index to Text
Apartheid, 13: see also Racial

Chindele, Gordon, 46

discrimination

Chitambala,

Frank,

108,

109, hi, 121
Banda, Betty

Chona, Mainza, 139, 144

(Mrs K. Kaunda), 21-2,

Christianity, Kaunda and,

104, 106

146-50

Banda, Dr Hastings, 44, 49,

Clutton-Brock, Guy, 130

117
Banda, Hyden D., 108

Colour bar: see Racial dis¬
crimination

Barton, Frank (journalist),

Evatt, Dr H. V., 81

63> 95
Bedford, the Rev. F. J., 22

Fox-Pitt, Comdr, 130

Benson, Sir Arthur, 84, 87,

Franklin, Harry,

94-5, 138

96, 100, 116-20
Gaunt, John, no, 137,

Brown, Dr (Mission doctor),

7, n

144
Gauntlett, Dr S. G., 90

Bwalya, Ason C., 53

Gore-Browne,

Lt

Col

Sir

Stewart, 20, 166

Chakulya, Wilson, 126,
132

Hatch, John, 82

Changufu, Lewis, 105

Huggins, Sir Godfrey, 71

Chembe, Francis, 96
Chibuta, Henry, 50

Johnson, James

Chifunda, Alick, 46

(Brit. Labour party), 89

Chileshe, Safeli, 46, 96
Kalichini, Paul, 99

Chimba, Justin, 42, 97
197

INDEX

TO

TEXT

Kalulu, Solomon, 97, 113

Malvern, Lord, 86

Kaluwa, George, 47, 64

Mathews, Z. K., 9

Kamanga, Reuben C., 42,

Mbalashi, Aaron, 35
Mbikusita, Mr, 43, 46, 49

97, 98, 105
Kapangala, R., 108

Mboya, Tom, 117

Kapufi, Ben, 105

Mee, Arthur, 31,52

Kapwepwe, Salome, 104

Meembe, Mr (African

Kapwepwe, Simon, 11, 23-

Methodist Episcopal
Church), 148

4, 36, 94, 97, 98, 107
at,

Moffat, Sir John, 88, 137,

Katilungu, Lawrence, 48, 96

Monckton Commission, 141,

Kaunda, David

145
Morris, the Rev. Colin, 83,

Kasama,

disturbances

73-4

ML 155

(K. D. Kaunda’sfather), 5
Kaunda, Musata (Kaunda’s
daughter), 22
Kaunda,

Panji

108
Mukupo, Titus

(Kaunda’s

{African Mail), 22, 62, 83,

son), 38

84, 97

Kombe, Ralph, 108

Mulenga, J. K., 108

Konkola, D., 98-9

Mulenga, Joseph L., 108

Loft, George

(Society of

Friends), 130
Macleod, Iain

Secretary),

Mumbi, John, 107
Mungoni, Edward, 75
Mushindo, the Rev. P. B.,

(Colonial

141,

144,

40
Musokotwane
(Senior Chief), 48

154-5, 156

McMinn, the Rev, R. D., 1,

Mwamba, Kosam, 67

7, 40
McPherson, the Rev. Fergus,

Nabulyato,

40, 43, 46, 48

30
Makasa, Robert, S., 38, 40,

Robinson,

Nelson,John (schoolmaster),

46, 73

23
198

INDEX

New

Chilenje

(township),

TO

TEXT

Sipalo, Munukayumbwa,
98, 105, 122, 127, 132

99? io4
Nightingale, the Rev. E. G.,
J38
Nkaka, Mr and Mrs, 37

Sokoni, John, 23-4, 28, 31,
36-8, 40
Sonquishe, Daniel (school¬
master), 16-17

Nkanza, the Hon. Wm, 112
Nkumbula,

Harry,

33-4,

Stokes, R. R., 43

43? 45-5E 60-71, 72,
77, 80-1, 84, 87, 92-8,

Sula, Simon, 40

117, 147-8

Tanganyika, 20,

Perth, Lord,

83, 94

Tembo, Nephas,

108

Temple, Merfyn,

83

Trade unions,
Racial discrimination, 31-

105

28-9

Trine, Ralph, Waldo,

53

6, 4i-3? 73-7
Van

Ridley report, 100
Roberts, John 12,

143-4

Robertson, the Rev.
Maxwell, 7, 11—13, 16

Scott,

Eeden plan, 63

Walsh,

P. J.,

I31? !38
Welensky, Sir Roy, 35, 86,
88, 143, 152-3, 155-8

Dr

(M.P. for Lusaka), 68-9

Father

Wicken,

Joan

E.

(Africa

Educational Trust), 130

‘Shikulu5: see McMinn, R.D.
Sikalumbi, W. K., 58, 60,

98

Zukas,

199

Simon

Ber, 45

Index to Appendices

Board,

Affairs

African,

ff; African villages’

174

nations to,

do¬

187-8

Constitution, Territorial, 167

African National Congress:
see Congress

ff

Africans’ contribution to de¬

Copperbelt, development of
the, 164-5

velopment in N. Rhodesia,
181

D emocratic

Apartheid, 176

government

as ultimate aim,
British

citizenship,

Dominion

Afri¬

Party

175-6
and

the

franchise, 181

cans’ attitude to, 168-9

Dominion status, Africans’
Cassava

Gwembe

as

factor

Valley

opposition to, 175

in

distur¬

Educational

bances, 190-5 passim
Chartered

Company

and

the franchise, 170

(of

Empire-building in Africa,

Cecil Rhodes), 162, 163,

161

165

Evangelization in coloniza¬

Chibalo: see forced labour

tion of Africa, 161

Chiefs and Headmen, 183-

Executive Council, member¬

93 passim

ship of, 168

Commonwealth citizenship,

Extremism,

Africans’ attitude to, 169
Communal

tests

and

Africans’

view

of, 181

common

rolls, 167-70 passim

Federal Assembly,

Congress, (proposals by, 183

resentation in, 172-3
200

rep¬

INDEX

Federation,
sition

to,

TO

APPENDICES

African

oppo¬

Mambo, Simon, 186-7, 189-

165-6;

white

90
Means tests and the fran¬

settlers’ desire for, 178
Females and the franchise,
168

chise, 170-1
Minority

Food, collective storage of,
187-90 passim, 193-5

groups,

reserved

seats for, 169
Moffat resolutions, 178-9

Forced labour, 188-9, I93_4
Franchise

The,

Africans’

proposed reforms, 166 ff;

Nkumbula,

policy of, 196

British Govt’s policy on
qualifications for, 180 ff

Harry, 188

Non-co-operation, African
Northern Rhodesia’s history
as

Freedom, denial of, 187

British

Protectorate,

162-6, 176 ff
Gwembe Valley

distur¬

Nzembwe: see food, collective
storage of

bances, 186—196

Paramountcy,
Huggins, Sir Godfrey,

African,

165; v. ‘partnership’ policy

165

178-80
Partition of Africa, 161

Johnston,

Sir

Harry,

‘Partnership’ v. African para¬

163

mountcy, 178-80
Passfield, Lord, and native

Labour,

Africans’ attitude

to, 163
Legislative

policy, 165
Provincial

Council,

distri¬

Councils

(Afri¬

can), abolition of, 166

bution of seats in, 167-9,
Representation,

171, 176-8

cans’ demands for in Fed¬

Livingstone, David, and
slave-trading,

Afri¬

eration, 166 ff; by Africans

161

on

Legislative

177-8

Magic and witchcraft, 163
201

Council,

INDEX

TO

APPENDICES

Representative Council

Tax-paying as voting quali¬

(African), abolition of, 166
Rhodes,

Cecil:

see

under

fication, 168
Trade as factor in coloniza¬
tion of Africa, 161

Chartered Company
Salisbury, 5th

of,

on

Tribes, invasions and settle¬

Marquess

colonization

ments of, 163

of

Africa, 162
Slave-trading, 161, 163
Southern Rhodesia and the
Federation,
Taxation

165,

Warfare, inter-tribal, 163

Welensky,

174

of Africans, 174,

Sir

federation

Roy,

policy,

and
165,

178
Written

181

language,

lack of, 163

202

tribes’

DT 963 .K3 u „

Kaunda, Kenneth D. (Kenne
Zambia shall be free : an auto

010101 000

163 0 97889 0

TRENT UNIVERSITY

DT963 ,K3
Kaunda. Kenneth
David
7

Zambia shall be free.

DATE

ISSUED TO

44738

44738
DT

963
K3
Trent
University

Kaunda, Kenneth David
Zambia shall be free

