












,
University of
Texas Libraries
THE UNIVEIUJTV OF TEXAS AT J,USTIN
























'iW'i l'il r,,,i;:3'		

)

















THE_ GENERAL LIBRARIES
I,	THE UNIVERSITY
OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN	a.
 
- THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE REVOLUTION



PRESENTED BY



Dr. William S. Livingston

BOOK I









"MONDIA.LE" Press -  Cairo.







-;;.












.V,,i
z




















































INTRODUCTION

   These impressions on the Philosophy of the Revolu­ tion were not meant to be published as a book.
   Neither are they an attempt to explain the events of the Revolution of July 23rd and its objectives.
They aim at something else altogether.
They are like a reconnaissance-patrol.  They are an
-effort to explore within ourselves who we are and what our role in the successive stages of the history of Egypt really is.
   They are an attempt to explore the conditions sur­ rounding us, past, present and future, and find out the path along which we can proceed.
They are an effort to find out objectives we should
:aim at and the energy we should mobilise to achieve those objectives.
They are an attempt to discover the pattern of our
,environment so that we should know that we do not live on an isolated island surrounded with water on every side.
   Such is the object I aim at: a mere patrol in the field in which we are fighting our greatest battle for the  liberation  of  our  country  from  all  fetters  and
$hackles.




 
	













PART I.


   It is not philosophy -		Attempts which fa'iled - · Not a mere mutiny - -		rV e were in Palestine and our dreams were in Eqypt -			 A.hmed Abdel Aziz before his death -	A lesson from Israel -	Schoo-lda:ys - Truth and leisure -	vVhy was it essential that the Army should move ? -			The complete	picture -
The vanguard and the mciss-formations -	 Ideals and,. aspirations -	A typical 1nember  o/  the	Revolution
Council -	Psycholog'ical crisis -	Two revolutions at the same time -	To prevent an accident on the way_


























		










   Before proceeding with this discourse I would like to pause for a while at the word "Philosophy".  It looks big and grand.  As I see it, I feel I am facing a world that has no boundaries. I have within me a secret feel­ ing hindering me from plunging into a bottomless sea. From the shore I stand upon, I cannot see the other side. The truth is I am anxious to avoid the use of the word "Philosophy'' with reference to what I shall say. I find it difficult to discuss the Philosophy of the Revo­ lution for two reasons: First, the Philosophy of the Revolution of July 33rd should be treated by professors who shou1d search deeply into it for the roots spreading at tlie very depth of the history of our people. The stories of national struggles have no gaps that can be filled with nonsense.  Neither have they the surprises that spring into existence without preludes.
   The struggle of any nation in its successive genera­ tions is a structure . that ;rises one stone upon another. And as .each stone lies solidly on another, so do the events of the struggle.  Each event is the outcome of its :predecessors, and is, at the same time, an introduc­ tion to something still in the lap of the unknown.
***




	









10

   I  do not pretend to be a professor of history.  This, is the 1ast thing I would dare to imagine.  Nevertheless, if I  were to attempt to study the story of our struggle likea  school-boy just beginning, I would say, for in­
stance, that the revolution of July .Z3rd is the realisation


11

cause they were cheated iin Palestine or because the defective arms roused their indignation and because they suffered an indignity in the elections of the Officers' Club, the whole affair would not have deserved to·be called a revolution.  A mere mutiny would have been a

of a	hope that have aspired to

the people of Egypt, in modern times, since. they began to think of governing

suitable description for it even if it were attributed to causes fair and just in themselves.	All these were inci­

themselves and since they decided to be the masters of their fate.
   One attempt failed to realise this hope when El Sayyed Omar Makram led the movement for appointing Mohamed Aly viceroy of Egypt in the name of its people. Another attempt failed to fulfil this aspiration when
Orabi rose demanding a constitution.
   Other vain attempts foUowed during the inteUectuaJ fervour in the period between the revolt of Orabi and the Revolution of 1919. This latter was led by Saad Zaghloul, who again failed to reach his goal.
**:
    It is not  true that the revolution of July 23rd started on account of the results of the war in Palestine. Neither was it caused by defective arms, to which officers and men fell victims. It is still further from the truth to attribute it to the crisis of the elections of the Officers' Club. In my opinion its causes are deeper and farther. Had the officers endeavoured to avenge themselves be-

dental. Perhaps their greatest influence was that they urged us to march forward along the r,pad to revolution; but without them we were marching just the same.
    Today I am trying to recall all the events that passed and, now that years have elapsed since we first thought of the revolution, to go back to the first day I discovered the seeds of revolt within me. That day lies farther in my life than November 1951, when the crisis of the Officers' Club elections began. The organisation of the Liberal Officers was then existing and active. JI do not exaggerate when I say that the crisis of the Officers' Club elections was caused, more than anything else, by the activities of the Liberal Officers. We were determined to fight then in order to test the strength of our mass formation and organisation.
    That day lies again fu er in mylife than the beginning of the scandal of defective arms. The Liberal Officers' Organisation existed before that. Their cir­ culars gave the first warning of the impending tragedy. Behind the uproar that 1 se on account of the defective·

















12·

arms their activities lay.	Nay, that day goes back still further in my life than May 16, 1944, which marked the start of my life in the Palestine War.	As I trace the details of our experience in Palestine I feel a strange sensation.	We were fighting in Palestine but our dreams were in Egypt.	Our bullets were aimed at the enemy lurking in the trenches in front of us, but our hearts were hovering round our distant Mother Country, which was then a prey to the wolves that ravaged it.	In Pales­ tine.Liberal Officers' cells were meeting in trenches and· posts, studying and searching.	And it was in Palestine that Salah Salem and Zakaria Mohy-el-Din came to me after penetrating the siege of Falouga; there we sat besieged neither knowing what was to become of that

13

days I spent in trenches pondering over our problems. Falouga was then besieged and the enemy had concen­ trated his guns and aircraft heavily upon it.	Often I said to myself, "Here we are in these underground holes besieged.	We were cheated into a war unprepared and our destinies have been the plaything of passions, plots and greed.		Here we lie under fire unarmed."
   As I reached that stage in my thinking my feelings would suddenly jump across the battlefront, across fron­ tiers, to Egypt.	I found myself saying, "There is om­ Mother Country, a far, far bigger Falouga.	What is happening in Palestine is but a miniature picture of what is happening in Egypt.	Our Mother Country has. been likewise besieged by difficulties as well as ravaged

siege nor when it would end.	We spoke of nothing but

by an  enemy.

She was cheated and pushed to fight

<>ur country and how to deliver it. It was in Palestine that Kamal El Dine Hussein sat beside me one day and spoke as his eyes and his thoughts wandered; "Do you know what Ahmad Abdel Aziz told me before he died?"

unprepared.	Greed, intrigue and passion have with her and left her under fire unarmed."
::*! *

toyed

he asked. "What did he say?" I asked in return. In a deep tone of voice and with a still deeper look he said, "Listen Kamal, Egypt is the field of our supreme war effort."
*
   In Palestine I not only met friends that shared the work for Egypt, but there also I discovered the thoughts t  shed their light on the road ahead.  I remember the
    
Besides, it was not only the friends I met in Pales­ tine who spoke to me of the future of our country, not only the experience that I had gathered there that ham­ mered at my mind with warnings and forebodings; but the enemy also played his part in reminding us of our homeland and its difficulties. A few months ago I read some articles written about me by. a Jewish officer nam­ ed Yerdan. Cohen.  These were published in the· Jewish















14

Observer. In these articles he related how he met me during the contacts and discussions of the Armistice. "The subject that Gamal Abdel Nasser discussed with me," he stated, "was IsraePs struggle against the Eng­ lish, how we succeeded in mobilising world public opinion against them."
    The day I discovered the eeds of revolt within me was still further back than February 4, 1942.  I wrote to a friend later saying, "What is to be done now that the catastrophe has befallen us, and we have accepted it, surrendered to it and taken it submissively and meek- 1y."  "I really believe," I continued, "that Imperialism

15

 -The·fact is that .this blow br"ought life back to some and made them realise that they should be prepared to defend their honour. That, in itself, was a severe lesson.
***
   That day is again far more distant in my life than the feverish days I lived as a student, marching in de­ monstrations, clamouring for the restoration of the 1923 constitution, which was duly restored in 1935, the days when I used to join delegations of students calling on leaders in their homes and demanding from them to unite for the sake of Egypt.  As a result of these efforts the

_is playing a one-card game in order to threaten only.
If ever it knew that there were Egyptians ready to shed their blood and to meet force by force it would withdraw and recoil like a harlot. This, of course, is the state or habit of hnperialism everywhere." That even had a new influence on the spirit and feeling of the army and our­ selves. Henceforth officers spoke not of corruption and pleasure, but of sacrifice and of their willingness to give up their lives to save their country's dignity. They all repented they did not intervene, however weak they may ave obviously been, to redeem their country's honour
.and to wash this shame away with their very blood. But let us wait.  Tomorrow will soon be here.
   Some tried to avenge·this but the time for revenge had gone. · Hearts were full .of fire and sorrow.

National Front was formed in 1936. I remember that during the period of boiling over I wrote on September 2, 1935, to a friend of mine, now Dr. Aly El Nashar, the
following letter: Brother Aly,
On August 30th I telephoned your father enquiring
after you. He informed me you were at school. I there­ fore decided to write what I had intended to convey to you by telephone. The Lord hath said, "Prepare for them (the enemy) whatever force you can," but where is the force we prepare? The present situation is critical and Egypt is in a still more critical position.  We are just about to bid life farewell and meet death. Despair is a solid structure; and who is to demolish it?








	








 



16	17
·· · I wonder when it was that I discovered the seeds of

.revolt within me.  I believe that such seeds were not
:embedded in my heart alone and that I found them in the hearts of others, who could not themselves trace them to their origin in themselves. It seems clear that these seeds were innate in us; they lay dormant and in­ erited in our souls, a legacy from a previous generation.
*	I
**
   I have said all this to explain the first reason why I find it  difficult to  talk about the  philosophy  of  the
-revolution and mentioned that such talk needs professors to delve into the depths of our  history and trace the
:roots therein planted.	The second reason is that I my­
-self was amidst the· whirlwind of the revolution.	Those who are at the depths of the whirlwind are hardly con-
:scious of whatever is away from it.   ·
   It was thus that my faith and my mind were follow­ ing everything that happened, and the way it happened, and therefore I cannot divert myself of my soul when
1 discuss these events and what hidden ideas lay at their
:roots.
   I firmly believe that nothing can live in a vacuum. The truth that is latent in our depths is this: whatever we imagine to be the truth is, in fact, the truth·plus the
-contents of our souls; our souls are but the vessels wherein lives everything in us, and the shape of this

vessel gives form to whatever is introduced into it, even
facts.
  I	try, as far as is humanly possible, to  heck myself from changing the form of the truth, andI	am	sure l shall succeed to a considerable extent.
   There is the question; and to do justice to myself and to the philosophy o.f the revolution I leave it to history to gather how it was within me, how it was within others and how it. appeared in events; and from
all these the whole truth will emerge.
***
What is it then I would like to discuss if I eliminate
the word "philosophy''? I have but two things to men­ tion in this connection. First are some feelings which took the vague farm of a hope at the beginning and becamea definite idea and a practical plan prior to mid­ night of July 23rd. Secondly are some experiences that changed this hope and plan into action at midnight of
July 23rd and onwards until now.
   It is these feelings and experiences that I would like to discuss.	One question has persistently occurred to me: Was it our duty, as an army, to do what we did on July . 1952'?	I have just explained how the revolution of July 23rd was the realisation of a hope·that dangled before the eyes of the people of Egypt since they began, .






	










18

in modern times, to think having the final word on



 of governing themselves and their destiny.

19

Other things we said; but what was most significant of all is the feeling deep down in our consciousness that

   If this be so, and if what took place on July 23rd was only a military mutiny anci not a popular revolt, why was the army then, apart from any other forces, destined to carry out this revolution?

this was our duty. If we· did not perform it we would betray the sacred trust in our charge. I admit that the complete picture was not yet very vivid in my imagina­ tion until I went through a long experience after July-

   Throughout my life I have had faith in militarism. The soldier's sole duty is to die on the frontiers of his co"!mtry.  Why then was our army compelled to act in the capital and not on the frontier?
   Once more, let me reiterate that the defeat in Pales­ tine, the defective arms, the crisis of the Officers' Club election were not the real springs from which the cur­
-rent flowed. They may have accelerated the flood but they could never be the original source. Why then did this duty fall upon the army?  This question has often
-Occurred to me. It came to me persistently during the stage of hoping, of thinking and of planning before July 23rd. It repeated itself several times during the experi­ mental period after July 23rd. We had different factors to justify action before July 23rd and to explain why it was imperative that the army should act. "If the army does not move," we said to ourselves, "who else will?" We were the ghost with which the tyrant haunted the dreams of the nation. It was high time that the same ghost turned against the tyrant and upset his dreams.

23rd.	The very details of this experience were in them­
selves the details of the picture.

:J!
\	.,..,. ..
confess  that  after  July  23rd  I  suffered  fits in
which I accused myself, my colleagues and the rest of
th/army of committing rashness and folly on July23rd.
   Prior to that date I imagined that the whole nation was on tip-toes and prepared for action, that it awaited the advance of the vanguard and the storming of the outside walls for it to pour down in a solid phalanx: marching faithfully to the great goal.	I	thought we were only the pioneers and the commandoes, that we would only be in the front for a few hours, and that we would be soon followed by the solid masses marching to the goal.	My imagination often carried me away. I felt I could hear the tramping of their solid, orderly­ rows as they marched onwards to the main front.	My faith was such as to render everything I heard a con­ crete fact and not a mere vision.













20
   After July 23rd I was shocked by the reality. The vanguard performed its task; it stormed the wails of the fort of tyranny; it forced Farouk to abdicate and stood by expecting the mass formations to arrive at their ultimate object. It waited and waited. Endless crowds showed up, but how different was the reality from the vision! The multitudes that arrived were dispersed fol­ lowers and disparate remnants. The holy march towards the great goal was interrupted. A dismal picture, hor­ rible and threatening, then presented itself. I felt my heart changed with sorrow and dripping with bitterness. The mission of the vanguard had not ended. In fact it was just beginning at that very hour. We needed dis­ dpline but found chaos behind our lines. We needed unity but found dissention. We needed action but found nothing but surrender and idleness.  It  was from this
.source and	no other that the revolution  derived its
motto.
***
We did not expect this shock.  "\IVe went to the men
of  ideas for counsel and to the men of experience for
guidance,  but  unfortunately  we did  not  find  much  of
.either. Every leader we came to wanted to assassinate his rival. Every idea we found aimed at the destruction of another. If we were to carry out all that we heard, then there would not be one leader left alive.  Not one


21

idea would remain intact.	We would cease to havea mission save to remain among the smashed bodies and the	broken debris Iaiv.enting  our  misfortune  and re-
proaching our ill-fate.
   Complaints and petitions- poured upon us in thous­ ands.  If these had referred to cases worthy of justice, or had mentioned ·oppression that might be redressed, they would have been understandable and logical. The majority of these were but persistent demands for re-; venge, as if the revolution were meant to be a weapon
for revenge and hatred.
;!*.::;:
   flad I been asked then what I required most my instant answer would have been, "To hear but one Egyp­ tian uttering one word of justice about another, to see but one Egyptian not devoting his time to criticising wilfully the ideas of another, to feel that there was but one E.gyptian ready to open his heart to forgiveness, indulgence and love for his brother Egyptians. Personal and persistent selfishness was the rule of the day. The word "I" was on every tongue.	It was the magic solu­ tion of every difficulty and the effective cure for every malady.	I often met men, referred to in the press as ''great men", of various tendencies and colours, from
whom I sought the solution of a difficult problem. I could hear nothing from them save the word "I".	He








	

	



	
	

	








22

and only he was capable of understanding the problems of economics; the rest were but children creeping on all




'\Ve sincerely wish the country



.	23
had no further use for us
1

fours.  He and only he was the expert statesman and the rest only learning their a and b and had not got to c. After interviewing any of these men I would go back to my colleagues bittery exclaiming, "How utterly futile... ! H we were to ask that man about a difficulty in fishing off the Islands of Hawaii his answer would only be "I".
**:
    I remember I once visited one of our universities and. sat with professors, endeavouring to profit by the ex­ perience of men of learning.	Many spoke and spoke at length.		Unfortunately not one of them prasented a new idea.	Every one introduced himself and listed his morat capacities which, in his -view, could perform miracles.. Everyone eyed me as if I were to him more precious: than the treasures of earth or the blessings of eternity.. I could not help but remark to them all "Everyone in his place can perfonn miracles.	The primary duty is to put all one's energy into it and if you, as university professors, ever thought of students and rendered them, as you should, your principal care, you would provide
us with a tremendous force wherewith to build up our	1
country.	Let every one remain at his post and strive hard at it.		Do not look up to us.	Circumstances have:
•1
compelled us to leave our posts to perfonn a sacred task.
--

ss.ve as professional soldiers in the army. There we would have remained. I did not wish then to set before them the example of the members of the Revolution Council who, before the crisis sum one_d them for the supreme task, were performing their duties in the army most diligently.  I did not wish to tell them that most of the members of the Revolution Council were profes­ sors in the Staff College... a clear proof of their distinc­ tion as professional soldiers. Neither did I wish to mention to them that three members of the Revolution Council had received promotion on the field in Palestine, lest I should be regarded as boasting of my brethren and colleagues of the Revolution Council.
***
I admit the situation caused me a depressing psycho-
logical crisis.  But later, experience and reflection, and the true significance I derived from them, lightened the reaction of the crisis upon me and made me seek pretexts from the world of reality,. that came to me when the complete picture of the state of my country became clear to me. It, moreover, provided me with the answer to the_question which was always in my mind. That ques­ tion is: "Was it our duty, the Army's duty, to act as it did on July 23rd?" The unavoidable and inescapable answer is "Yes".







 



	 

25


24
   I can now say that we·are at present in the throes of two revolutions and not one.
***
Every  nation  on· earth  undergoes  two  revolutions=
One political, in which it recovers its right of self govern­ ment from an imposed despot or an army of aggression. occupying its territory without its consent.	The second revolution is social, in which the	classes of society struggle against each other until justice for all citizens has been gained and conditions have become stable.
   Other nations have preceded us along the path of human progress and passed through the two revolutions, but not simultaneously.  Hundreds of years separated the one from the other. In the case of our nation, it is going through the two revolutions together and at the same time, a great experiment putting us to the test, This test lies in the fact that the conditions of each revo-, lution are remarkably different, strangelt discordent and terrifically clashing. Political revolution demands, for its success, the unity of all national elements, their fusion and mutual support, as well as self-denial for the sake of the country as a whole.
***

trymen struggle against each other, as individuals and as classes. Corruption, suspicion, hatred and selfishness dominate them.  Between the anvil and the hammer we
·now  live in two revolutions:  one demanding  that we
:Should unite together, love one another and strain every
:nerve to reach our goal; the other forcing us,. in spite of
.ourselves, to disperse and give way to hatred, everyone
thinking only of himself.
Between the anvil and the hammer the 1919 Revolu,
1.ion failed to achieve the results whi<:h it ought to have realised. The ranks that massed in 1919 to face tyranny were, after a while, occupied only in internal strife. Tyranny became more arbitrary, whether it was in the form of the  open forces of occupation or their veiled
.cat's paws, ·headed by Sultan Fouad and later by his son '.Farouk. The nation reaped nothing but a crop of self­ suspicion, egoism and hatred, between individuals and
,classes alike.  The hopes which the 1919 Revolution was
.expected to realise faded. The fact that they faded only and did not die out is, due to the natural resistance of those hopes Which our nation had always entertained. This resistance was still alive then and preparing for
.another trial. Such was the state of affairs that pre­ vailed after the 1919 Revolution and which compelled the army to be the only force capable of action.
   The situation demanded that a homogeneous force should  emerge,  away,  to  a  certain  extent.  from  the













26

struggle of individuals and classes. This force should issue from the heart of the people.  Its members·should
have faith in each other and should have in their handk-
1
such elements of material force as to ensure swift and\
decisive action.  Such conditions did not prevail except \ in the army.	\
It was not the army, as I mentioned, that determined
its role in the events.  The opposite is nearer the truth. It was the events and their evolution that determined. for the army its role in the mighty struggle for the libe­ ration of the country.
**:
   I realised from the very beginning that our success depended on our complete understanding of the nature· of the -conditions we live in as related to our national history.	We were not in a position to change th_ese con-­ ditions by a mere stroke of the pen.	And we were not in a position to put back or put forward the hands of the clock and dominate- time.	We could not act, along· the route of history, as the traffic constable does on the· road; we could not stop the passage of one revolution to­ let through another, and therefore avoid a collision, The· only thing to do was to act as best we could, and escape· being crushed between the two .mill-stones.
   It was imperative that we should proceed with the·· two revolutions together.	The day we marched along

27

the path of political revolution and dethroned Farouk we tooka  similar step along the path of social revolution by limiting the ownership of agricultural land. 1 still believe until today that the revolution of July 23rd should retain its capacity for swift action and initiative in order that it may fulfill the miracle of proceeding with the two revolutions simultaneously, contradictory as our action may appear to be sometimes.
.,.
**
Whena  friend of mine came to me one day exclaim­
ing, "You asked for unity to face the English and at the same time you permit the Graft Court to proceed with its work," I  listened to him with .the image of our big
.crisis in my mind: the crisis of being between the two mill-stones.  One  revolution  demanded  that we should
:Stand in one row and forge"t the past, another revolution forced us to restore the lost dignity of moral values and
not forget the past.
   I did not say to my friend that the only way to safety was, as I mentioned, the capacity for swift action and init1ative as well as the capacity for marching along the
two paths together.
    This was not my will; nor was it the wi11 of those who took part in the revolution of July 23rd.  It was the will of fate, of the  history of  our  nation and the
stage it is passing through today.





\


   Positive action -	Enthusiasm is not enough - Bullets speak -	Crrying and wailing in the night -­ How easy to shed blood -		Roots in history -		God Almighty! God Almighty! -			Steel collapses -	1'hi!i society will crystallise -	People's nerves and minds
-	We  have angered  everybody	-	These are our
limitations and-that is our duty.



   What is it we want to do? And which is the way to it?
   The truth is that I often knew the answer to the first question. Such knowledge was not confined to me;. it was the hope held by our whole generation.
I i		AB for the answer to the second question -  the way to that which we want -  I confess it has undergone in my mind more changes than anything else. I almost believe that it is the biggest bone of contention in this generation.
   There is no doubt we all dream of Egypt free and strong. No Egyptian would ever differ with another about that.
   AB for the way to liberation and strength, that is the most intricate problem in our lives. I faced this com­ plex problem prior to July 23, 1952. I continued to face it after that, until its many angles, which had lain hidden under the shadows that fell upon them, became clear to me. I began to behold horizons which were shrouded out of my sight by the pall of darkness that had lain on our country for centuries.
*
I have felt, since consciousness first dawned within
me, that positive action is the only way. But what action?  The expression "positive action" may appear on paper sufficient to solve the problem.  But, in life, in












32
the	difficult circumstances our  generation  has  been io-
.		ing through and in this crisis that ravaged deeply ilto the destinies of our country, it was not sufficient. A.t one	stage of my life I considered enthusiasm posiive action.	Then my ideal in positive action changed Ultil I		came to realise that it was not enough that my nerres alone should cry out, and that I must communicate ny enthusiasm to others until their nerves also cried (tlt.
   In those days I was at the head of demonstratims in Al Nahda School.	From the bottom of my heat I clamoured for complete independence; others repealed my cries; but these were in vain.
   They were blown away by the winds and becane faint echoes that did not move mountains or sm1sh rocks. ,Later "positive action" meant in my opinion tiat all leaders of Egypt should unite on one thing.	r rebellious cheering crowds passed their homes one by one demanding, in the name of the youth of Egypt, tat they should unite on one thing.	It was a tragedy to my faith that the one thing they united on was the Treaty of 1936.
*
   Then came the Second World War and the evmts that preceded it. Both inflamed our youth and spnad fire to our innermost feelings. We,. the- whole genrn­ tion, began to move towards violence.  I confess, md I hope the Attorney-General will not incriminate me on



33

account of this confession, that political assassinations blazed in my enflamed mind during that period as the only positive action from which we could not escape, if we were to save the future of our country.
   I thought of assassinating many whom I regarded as obstacles between our country and its future.  I began to expose their crimes and set myself as a judge of their actions and of the harm that these brought upon the country; and then I would follow all this by the sentence that should be passed upon them.
   I	thought of assassinating the ex-King and those of his men who tampered with our sacred traditions.	 In this I		was not alone.	When I sat	with others our thoughts passed from thinking to planning.	Many a design did I draw up those days.	Many a night didI	lie awake preparing the means for the expected positive
action. Our life was, during this period, like an exciting detective story. We had great secrets; we had symbols; we hid in the darkness and arranged our pistols and bomb::; side by side. Those were the hope we dreamt of.
·we made many attempts in this_direction and I still re­ member, until to-day, our feelings and emotions as we dashed along the road to its end.
   The truth, however, is that I did not feel at ease in considering violence as the positive action essential for the salvation of our country's future.  I had within me







34
a feeling of distraction which was a mixture of complex and intermingled factors: of patriotism, religion, com­ passion, cruelty, faith, suspicion, knowledge and  ignor-
ance.
   Slowly and gently the idea of political assassination, which was blazing in my imagination, began to die out and lose its value to me as the realization of the expected positive action.
   I remember one night in particular which was deci­ sive in directing my thoughts and my dreams along that channel. We had prepared everything necessary for action. We selected one whom we found essential to put out of the way. We studied the circumstances of the life of this individual,. and made the plot in detail. This plot was to shoot him as he returned home at night. We organised an assault squad which would shoot him, another squad to guard this one and a third to organise the plan of getting away to safety after the plot had been fully carried out.
   The appointed night came and I went out myself with the squad of execution. E'verything went accord­ ing to our plan.
   The place was empty, as we had expected. The equads lay in the hiding places fixed for them. The person whom we wanted to get out of the way came and bullets were fired at him.  The squad of execution with-









.,.,

35

drew, covered in its retreat by the guards, and the ope­ ration of getting away began. I started my motor car and dashed away from the scene of the positive action we planned.  Cries, wailings and moans suddenly rang in my ears. The wailing of a woman, the voice of a scared child and continuous feverish appeals for help sasailed my ears. I was steeped in my rebellious set of
· emotions as my car rushed me along. I then became conscious of something strange; the sounds I heard were still tearing my ears, as well as the cries, wails and moans and the feverish appeals of help. I was then away from the scene, further than sound could reach. Nevertheless I felt all these beginning to haunt and chase me.
   I got home, threw myself on bed, my mind in a fever, my heart and conscience incessantly boiling. The cries, moans and wails and the appeals for help still ranging in my ears. All night long I could not sleep. I lay on my bed in the darkness, lighting one cigarette after another, wandering away with my rebellious thoughts, which were driven away by the sounds that haunted me. "Was I right?" I asked my self. With conviction I answered "My motives were patriotic." "Was this an unavoidable means?" I again asked myself. In doubt I replied: "What could we have done otherwise? Is it possible that the future of our country could change by getting rid of this one individual or another?  Is not the ques-














36
tion far deeper than this?"  In bewilderment I woui.d say to myself: I almost feel that the question is deeper. Vve dream of the glory of a nation. Which is more im­ portant?  That some one should pass away who should pass away or that someone should come who should come.
   As I mention this I see rays of light gradually filter­ ing through these crowded sensations. "What is impor­ tant," I would say to myself, "is that someone should come who should come. We are dreaming of the glory of a nation: a glory that must be built up".  As I tossed on my bed in a room full of smoke and charged with emotions, I found myself asking: "And then?" "And what theri ?" a mysterious voice called out. With deep conviction this time I again said to myself, "Our method must change. This is not the positive action we should aim at. The roots of the question go deeper. The problem is more serious and more far-reaching." At this I felt an undiluted relief which was soon dispersed by the cries, moans, wails and appeals whose echoes re­ sounded inside me. Suddenly I found myself exclaim­ ing, "I hope he will not die." It was indeed strange that dawn would find me wishing life for someone I wished dead the night before. I rushed anxiously to the morn­ ing papers. I was happy to find that the individual whose assassination I plotted was destined to live.
But  this  was not the fundamental  problem.  The


37

principal question was to find out the positive action. We began to think of something more deeply rooted, more serious and more far-reaching. We began to draw the preliminary lines of the vision that was realised in the night of July 2·3rd, namely a revolution springing from the very heart of the people, charged with its aspi­ rations and completing the steps it had previously taken along its destined path.
   I began this discourse with two questions: One was this: "What is it we want to do?" and the second, "Which is the way to what we want to do?" The answer of the first question, as I mentioned, was a hope unanim­ ously held. The answer of the second question, about the way to do what we wanted, I discussed at  length
until July 23rd.
***
   Bnt was what happened on July 23th all that we wanted to do? The answer is emphaticaily "No"; that was only the first step along the road.
   The ecstasy of success on July 23rd did not really deceive me. It did not seem to me that our hopes had been realised or that spring had come. The opposite might be the truth. Every moment carried to me a fresh success of the revolution, but it also laid unwittingly a heavy burden upon my shoulders.  I mentioned in Part I
















38	39


of this discourse that before July 23rd I thought the whole nation was standing on tip-toes  and ready for
action and that it was awaiting but the storming of the	i walls by the vanguard to rush forward in orderly mass formations.	I stated that our role as a vanguard could
take only a few minutes to perform, after which we	i
would be followed by the massed regular forces. I also described in that part of the picture the disputes, chaos, hatred and passions which were let loose, each trying by its egoism to exploit the revolution for its purposes. I said, and I shall go on saying,. that this was the most cruel shock I ever felt in my life. But I admit I should have expected all that happened since it was impossible to fulfil our dreams by merely pressing an electric but ton, and since it was impossible that the scrum and debris of centuries could disappear in the twinkling of an eye.
***
It was easy then, and I still find it easy now, to shed	j
the blood of ten, twenty, or thirty persons in order to
strike fear and panic in the hearts of many hesitants,	I
and thus force them to swallow their  passions,  their
hatred, and their whims. But what result could such an action achieve?  I used to think that the only way to face a problem was to trace it to its origin and to try follow the source from which it began. It was not just to impose a "reign of blood" upon us, regardless of the historical circumstances which our nation has been through and which left its imprint upon us and made us what we are to-day.  I said once that I did not pretend

to be a professor of history, for this is the last thing my imagination would aspire to. I said that I would make my attempts only as a child beginning his history course at school.
.-..!.*..-. .,,..!....
   Fate has so willed that we should be on the cross­ roads of the world. Often we have been the road which invaders took and a prey to adventurers. In certain circumstances we find it impossible to explain the factors latent in the soul of our nation without due consideration of these circumstances.
   In my opinion we cannot overlook the history of Egypt under the Pharaohs or the reaction between the Greek spirit and ours, the Roman invasion, and Muslim conquest and the waves of Arab migrations that fol­ lowed.
   I believe we should pause for a time and examine the circumstances we went through in the Middle Ages; for it is these that brought us to the stage we are in to-day.
   If the Crusades were the dawn of a renaissance in Europe they were also the commencement of the Dark Ages in our country. Our nation bore the brunt of the Crusades. They left it exhausted, poverty-stricken and destitute.  At the same time that it was menaced by the war, it suffered tyranny and lay prostrate under the spikes of the horses of the despots of Inner Asia. These were slaves when they first came. Then they turned against their masters and replaced them as princes. They were brought to Egypt in droves as Mameluke




1


40

slaves and after spending a time in this good and peace­ ful country they became kings. Tyranny, oppression and destruction became the characteristic feature of their rule, which enveloped Egypt in its blackness for

41

   I do not find an explanation for this save the deposits of the Mameluke reign, when princes used to wrestle against each other, and when horsemen fought in the streets, while people' rushed to their homes and locked themselves in, in order to be away from the fight which

centuries.	During that  period

our  country  became  a

did not concern them.

forest ruled by wild beasts.  The Mamelukes looked upon it as an easy prey. Their struggles turned on the parti­ tioning of the booty.  Our souls, our wealth and our land were the spoil.
;!**:
   Often, when I go back to turning the pages of our history, I feel sorrow tearing my soul as I consider the period when a tyrannical feudalism was formed, a feud­ alism which had no other object save to such the blood
   
It often appears to me that we resort to our imagi­ nation and demand that it should fulfil our desires in the sphere of fancy; we enjoy this fancy and thus rest too inactive to try to realise it.
   Many of us have not yet rid themselves of this feel­ ing; they have not assimilated the idea that this country is theirs and that they are its masters and the leaders of opinion and the proper authorities in it.
   I once tried to understand an expression I used often to shout as a child when I saw planes flying in the sky.

of  life out  of  our	veins  and

to sap  from them  the

I used to say: "Oh, God Almighty!	May a calamity

remnants of any feeling of power and of dignity.  It left in the depth of our souls an effect that we have to struggle long to overcome.
   In point of fact, when I visualise this effect I feel I can understand, on most occasions, some of the symp­ toms of our political life.
   It often appears to me that many adopt towards the revolution an attitude of spectators who have no other interest than waiting to see the result of the  battle in
which two sides, with whom they have not the least

betake the English!"
   I found out later that we inherited the expression from our forefathers in the days of the Mamelukes. It was not then applied to the English, but it was modified by us or by the unchanged and latent deposits in us. We only changed the name of the oppressor. Our fore­ fathers used to say, "0 God Almighty! Send the Osmanly to perdition!"
:J:
!?: :?:
In  the  same unchanged spirit the idea was often ex­

c::mnection, are struggling.	I attitude and say to myself and "Why don't they come forward?

often rebel against this to some of my friends: Why don't they emerge

pressed by our tongues. The name English replaced the name Osmanly, in accordance with the political changes that followed upon Egypt between the two epochs.

from their hiding places, to speak and move."

42
   Then what happened after the Mameluke period? The French expedition came. The iron curtain that the Tartars imposed upon us was torn away. New ideas poured upon us. New horizons, hitherto unknown to us, opened.
   The Dynasty of Mohamed Aly inherited all the con­ ditions of Mameluke life,, even though it endeavoured to dress them in the fashionable clothes of the nineteenth century. Our contacts with Europe and the world were resumed anew. Consciousness, in a modern sense, dawn­ ed upon us and brought with it a new crisis.
   We were, in my opinion, like a patient who had spent too long a time in a closed chamber. The heat inside the closed chamber became such that the patient was almost suffocated. Suddenly a storm raged and wrecked the windows and doors. Cold draughts rushed in lashing the body of the patient, still soaked in perspiration. The patient was in need of a breath of air. Instead a violent cyclone burst upon him and fever ravaged his exhausted body.
   This is exactly what happened to our society. It was a really dangerous experiment. European spciety had passed through the stages of its evolution in an orderly manner. It crossed the bridge between the Renaissance at the end of the Middle Ages and the Nineteenth Cen­ tury step by step. The stages of this evolution systema­ tically succeeded one another. In our case everything was sudden. We lived behind an iron curtain which suddenly collapsed.  We were cut off from the world; we renounced its life, especially after trade with the East was derouted to the Cape of Good Hope.  European

43

countries eyed us covetously and regarded us as . a short cut to their colonies in the East and the South.
   Torrents of ideas and opinions burst upon us, which we, at that stage of our evolution, were incapable of assimilating. Our spirits were still in the Thirteenth Century though the symptoms of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries infiltrated in their various aspects. Our minds were trying to catch up with the advancing caravan of humanity from which we had fallen back five centuries or more.  The course was exhausting and the
race was terrible.
'  -
*?:
   There is no doubt that this state of affairs was res­ ponsible for the absence of a united public opinion in our country. The gulf between one individual and another, and one generation and another, became particularly wide.
   At one time I complained that people did not know what they wanted. They were not unanimous in their choice of the way to take. I realised later that I de­ manded the impossible and that I took no account of the circumstances of our society.
   We live in a society that has not yet c);'ystallised. It is still boiling over and restless. It has not yet grown calm or settled down, so as to continue its gradual evolu­ tion parallel with other nations which preceded it along the road.
   I believe, without paying any compliment to people's emotions, that our nation has realised a miracle. Any nation, exposed to the same conditions as our country,




44	45

could easily have been lost.	It could have been swept away by the torrents that fell upon it.	But it stood
in the	violent earthquake.
   It is true we nearly lost our equilibrium in some cir­ cumstances; but generally we did not fall to the ground. As I consider one normal Egyptian·family out of th thousands that live in the capital, I find the following: the father, for example, is a turbaned 'fellah' from the heart of the country; the mother a lady descended from Turkish stock; the sons of the family are at a school nhich has adopted the English system; the daughters, the French.	All this lies between the Thirteenth century and the outward appearances of the Twentieth.
   As I see this I feel I can comprehend the bewilder­ ment and the confusion that assail us. Then I say to myself, "This society will crystallise; its component parts will hold together; it will form a homogeneous entity; but this necessitates that we should strain our nerves during the period of transition."
   Such, then, are the roots from which sprang out con­ ditions of today. Such are the sources from which our crisis derives. If I add to these social origins the cir­ cumstances for which we expelled Farouk and for which we wish to liberate our country from every foreign sol­ dier; if we add all these together, we shall discover the wide sphere in which we labour and which is exposed, from every side, to the winds, to the violent storm that rages, to flashing lightning and roaring thunder. As I stated, it is not fair that a "reign of blood" should be imposed upon us in this sphere, if we take all these circumstances and conditions into consideration.


   Therefore, one may ask, ·"Which is the way? And what is our role in it?"  The way is that which leads to economic and political freedom.
   Our role is the role of the watchmen only, no more and no less, watchmen for a definite period with a time limit.
   How similar is our nation today to a caravan that had to take a certain route! The route was long; thieves and highwaymen attacked the caravan; it was led astray by a mirage; and finally it dispersed, each group wand­ ering to a different place and every individual takirig a different direction.
   How similar is our mission in these circumstances to the part of someone going out of his way to gather these wandering lost wayfarers in order to put them again on
the right track and leave them to proceed with their march!
   This is our part, and I cannot imagine any other.  If it occurred to me to solve all the problems of our coun­
try, I should be a dreamer; and I am not fond of clinging to dreams.
   We have neither the capacity to do this nor the ex­ perience to achieve it.  Our job is, as I said, to define the land-marks of the road, to lead the wanderers back to where they should resume their march, and to catch up with those who are pursuing the mirage and convince them of the futility of what they are doing.
I  fully knew from the  beginning  that our mission
. would not be an easy one and that it would cost us much
of our popularity.	\Ve have to speak frankly and speak











	





46
straight to the minds of the people.  Our predece ors used to offer people nothing but dreams, and utter no­
thing but what people liked to.hear.
How easy it is to speak to people's instincts and how
difficult to address their minds! Our instincts are the same, but our minds are subject to diversity and dispar­ ity. Egyptian politicians, in the past, were intelligent enough to realise his fact.  They aimed their words at the instincts of the people, leaving their minds wander­ ing in the desert. We could do the same. -We could charge people's nerves with big words, which are drawn from the world of imagination and which make them perform chaotic actions, for which they did not prepare or make any plan. We could leave them to cry their voices hoarse by cheering: "0 God Almighty! Would thata  calamity betake the English!", as our forefathers did under the Mamelukes when they cried, "0 Lord Al­
mighty!  Send the Osmanly to perdition!"
   Nothing followed their cries. Was this then the mis­ sion for which we were destined? What could we have achieved if we had really gone along that road?
I  mentioned  in  Part I  of  this discourse  that  the
success of the revolution depends on its comprehension of  the  real conditions facing it  and its  capacity for
-prompt action. To this I now add that it should be free from the effects of glittering words.  It should proceed with what it deems its duty, regardless of the price it may pay out of its popularity or of the cheers and the applause it mayre·ceive.  Otherwise we shall betray the trust we }J.old for the revolution and its duties.
***

47
   Many people come to me and exclaim, "You have angered everybodJ." '.('o which explanation I always reply, "It is not people's anger that influences the situa­ tion. The question should be : "Was what aroused their anger for the good of the country? Or for whose interest was it?"  I realise we have upset big landowners; but was it possible not to upset them and still see some of us owning thousands of acres, while others do not own the plot of land wherein they ar buried after .'their death?
   I realise we have aroused the wrath of the old poli­ ticians; but was.it possible not to do so and still see our country a victim to their passions, their corruption and their struggle for the spoils of office?
   I realise·we have angered many,government officials; but was it possible to spend more than half the budget on officials' salaries and yet allot,·as we have done, forty million pounds for productive projects? What would have happened if we had opened the coffers of the treasury of the state, as the old politicians did, and distributed their contents among officials and let come what may thereafter.  The year that followed would have found the Government unable to pay the salaries of officials.
   How easy it would have been to satisfy all those mal'­ contents! But what is the price that our countr:y would pay out of its hopes and its future for that satisfaction?'
***
Such is the role that history has fixed for us.	We
cannot escape from it however high a price we pay. We





48


never misunderstood this role, or the nature of the duties it imposed upon us. These are steps to redress the wrongs of the past and clear away the deposits. We have gone ahead with them and have suffered hardships for their sake.
As for the future, is is not for us only to speak.  In
order to safeguard political life we went to several leaders
of public opinion of various classes and creeds. We said to them, "Draw up a constitution which will safeguard the country's sacred heritage."  Hence the Commission of the Constitution.
   In order to guarantee economic life in future we sought the most eminent professors in the country and said to them, "Plan prosperity for the country and ensure for every citizen his daily crust of bread." Hence the Council of National Production.
These are our limits, which we have not transgress-
ed. To remove the rocks and the obstacles that block the way is our duty at whatever price. The way is open to whoever has ideas and experience to contribute to the future in all its aspects.  It is a duty imperative. upon us all. We must not be selfish and monopolise it. Our mission necessitates that weshould bring all together for the sake of Egypt, E:gypt the strong, Egypt the free.








PART ill.


   After an absence of three rrwnths -  Time and place Fate plays no jokes -  Three circles -  A role in search of a hero -  Palestine is not a foreign land
-Face to face with poverty in Palestine - The most valued news of aviation -  Ideas in the battlefield -
-  The earth and the stars -  A glance at Weizmann's memoirs - The single struggle and its elements - Force expressed in figures - Our responsibilities in life -  Wisdom -  The reality in
p lgrimage.






   For the third time I return to the philosophy of the revolution.	I revert to it after three months or more full of	rapid events and successive developments.	Three months have passed during which, more than once, I tried to find time to record these impressions on the Philoso­ phy of the Revolution.	My efforts have gone with the winds of successive developments, which blew them away and dispersed them in space.
   But the wind that blew away my efforts to register my impressions hardly affected the impressions them­ selves. It is true these impressions were not recorded on paper but they continued to turn round and round in my mind and react with other impressions already there, seeking other details, whether in my memory or in the events of the day, to add to themselves and thus make the picture correct and clear.
   But what is that correct and clear picture I would like to draw this time? And what relation has it to the attempts I had made to depict, in the first part of this discourse and then in the second part, these impressions on the Philosophy of the Revolution?
   In Part I, I discussed how the revolution first started within us as individuals, in ourselves as normal types of the youth of our generation.  I spoke of the revolution and its place in the history of our people, and of July 23rd as a day in that revolution.  Tn Part II, I dealt with the attempts we made as we proceeded along the road






52
to revolution and how our national history determined that road, whether in our consideration of the past,a consideration full of morals, or in our aspiration of the future, an aspiration charged with hope.
I  spoke then of  "time" but "place" also claims its
right. Let me therefore speak of "place" on this occa- sion.
  I do not aim at a complicated philosophical discussion of "time and place," but there is no doubt that theworld, andnotourcountry only, is the result of the reaction of time and place. In depicting the circumstances of our country, I said we could not forget the element of "time". We cannot forget the element of "place" either.
   In simple language, we cannot go back to the Tenth Century and wear its robes, which strike us as curious and ridiculous now-a-days.	Neither can we lose our way in the ideas which appear in front of us utterly black without a single ray of light filtering through them. In thesame way we cannot act as if our country werea part of Alaska in the Far North or as if we were on Wake Island, which lies distant and deserted in the vast­ ness of the Pacific.	If time imposes upon us its evolu­ tion, place also imposes upon us its reality.	Having discussed time on the two previous occasions I shall now
discuss place.
***
We should first of all agree upon one thing before
we proceed further with this discourse, and that is.to

53

define the boundaries of place as far as we are concerned. If I am told that our place is the capital we live in I beg­ to differ. If I am told that our place is limited by the political boundaries orf our country I also do not agree. If our problem, as a whole, were confined within our capital or inside our political boundaries, it would be easy. We would lock ourselves in, close all the doors and live in an ivory tower away as much as possible from the world, its complications, its wars and crises. AH these crash through the gates of our country and leave their effects upon us though we have nothing to do with them.
   The era of isolation is now gone. Gone also are the days when barbed wire marked the frontiers separating and isolating countries. Every country must now look beyond its frontiers to find out where the currents that affect it spring, how it should live with others... etc. It has become imperative that every country should look around to find out its position and its environment and decide what it can do, what its vital sphere is, where is the scene of its activity and what its positive role can be in this troubled world.
   As I sit in my study and think quickly of this subject I often ask myself, "What is our practice role in this troubled world and where is the scene in which we can play that role?"

   I survey our conditions and find that we are in a group of circles which should be the theatre of our activ• ity and in which we try to move as much as we can.









	





5<1




Fate does not play jokes.	Events are not produced


55

   All these are fundamental facts, whose roots lie deep in our life; whatever we do, we cannot forget them or

haphazardly.  Existence cannot come out of nothing.
   We cannot look stupidly at a map of the world not realising our place therein and the role determining to us by that place.  Neither can we ignore that there is an Arab circle surrounding us and that this circle is as mucha part of us as we are a part of it, that our history has been mixed with it and that its interests are linked with ours.  These are actual facts and not mere words.
   Can we ignore that there is a continent of Africa in which fate has placed us and which is destined today

run away from them.
*
I see no reason, as I sit alone in my study with my
thoughs wandering away, why I should recall, at this stage of my thinking, a well-known story by the Italian poet Luigi Pirandello which he called, "Six Personalities in Search of Actors."
   The annals of history are full of heroes who carved for themselves great and heroic roles and played them on momentous occasions on the stage.  History is also

to witness a terrible

struggle on its future?	This strug­

charged with great heroic roles for which we do not find

gle will affect us whether we want it or not.
   Can we ignore that there is a Moslem world with which we are tied by bonds which are not only forged by religious faith also tightened by the facts of  history? I  said once that fate plays no jokes. It is not in vain that our country lies to the south-west of Asia close to the Arab world, whose life is intermingled with ours.  It is not in vain that our country lies in the north-east of Africa, a position from which it gives upon the dark
continent, where in rages today the most violent struggle. between white colonisers and black natives for the pos­ session of its inehaustible resources. It is not in vain that Islamic civilization and the Islamic heritage, which the Mongols ravaged in their conquest of the old Islamic

actors.  I do not know why I always imagine that in this region in which we live there is a role wandering aimlessly about seeking an actor to play it. I do not know why this role, tired of roaming about in this vast region which extends to every place around us, should at last settle down, weary and worn out, on our frontiers beckoning us to move, to dress up for it and to perform it since there is nobody else who can do so.
   Here I hasten to point out that this role is not a leading role. It is one of interplay of reactions and expe­ riments with all these factors aiming at exploding this terrific energy latent in every sphere around us and at the creation, in this region, of a tremendous power cap­ able of lifting this region up and making it play its posi­

Capitals, retreated

and sought refuge in Egypt, where

tive role in the construction of the future of humanity.

they found shelter and safety as a result of the counter­ attack at Ein Galout with which Egypt repelled the in­ vasion of these Tartars.
   
There is no doubt that the Arab circle is the most important and the most closely connected with us.	Its














56

history merges with ours. We have suffered the same hardships, lived the same crises and, when we fell pros­ trate under the spikes of the horses of conquerors, they
lay prostrate with us.

,Sf

   And when ·the Palestine crisis loomed on the horizon I was firmly convinced that the fighting in Palestine was not fighting on foreign territory.  Nor was it in­ spired by sentiment. · It was a duty imposed by self­ defense.

   Religion also fused this circle with us. of religious enlightenment radiated from Koufa and later from Cairo.
 
The centres Mecca, from

***
I rem.ember one day, after the partition of Palestine
was declared in September 1947, the Liberal Officers held

   These were also collected in an environment in which all these historic, spiritual and material factors are closely knitted.  As far as I am concerned, I remember that the first elements of Arab consciousness began to filter into my mind as a student in secondary schools, from where I went out with my fellow schoolboys on strike on December 2nd of every year as a.protest against the Balfour Declaration by which England gave the Jews a  national home usurped unjustly from its legal owners.
   When I asked myself at that time why I left my school enthusiastically and why I was angry for this land which I never saw I could not find an answer except the echoes of sentiment. Later a form of comprehension of this subject begah when I was a cadet in the Military College studying the Palestine campaigns in particular and the history and conditions of this region in general, which rendered it, throughout the last century, an easy prey ravaged by the claws of a pack of hungry beasts.
   My comprehension began to be clearer as the foun­ dation of its facts stood out when I began to study, as a student in the Staff College,. the Palestine campaign and the problems of the Mediterranean in greater detail.

.a meeting during which they decided to assist the resist­
.ance movement in Palestine. The next day I went to the house of Hadj Amin El Husseini, the Mufti of Pales­ tine, who lived in Zeitoun then. I said to him, "You need officers to direct battles, and to train volunteers. There
.are a great number of officers in the Egyptian Army who would like to volunteer. Uley are a_tyour disposal any time you require."  Hadj Amin expressed admiration of the spirit but the thought he would ask permission of the Egyptian Government before he said anything. He said to me, "I shall give you my reply after I have re­ ceived the permission of the Egyptian Government." I went back to him after a few days. The answer he re­ ceived from the Egyptian Government was refusal.
   But we did not remain silent. Later the artillery of Ahmed Abdel Aziz began to hammer the Jewish colonies south of Jerusalem. The artillery officer in charge was Kamal El Dine Hussein, a member of the constituent
-committee of  the  Liberal Officers, which has  now be-
-come the Council of the Revolution.
I also recall another secret which was the most valued
by  the  liberal officers.	Hassan Ibrahim: had  left for














 ma.scus, where he contacted some officers of l?awzy El Kawookgy. El-.Kawopkgy was then the commander of the for es of Arab Liberation, and was preparing a decisive battle in the northern zone of Palestine. Hassan and Abdel Latif El Boghdadi drew up an audacious plan for a decisive action in the battle, for which the Libera­ tion forces were then preparing. The main lines of this plan were: That the Arab Liberation Forces had no planes to support them in the battle and tilt the balance of victory in their favour. Had they had a supporting force from the air, which would bombard the focus of the operation from above, it would have been a deciding factor. But where could the Liberation Forces get the planes to fulfil this dream?
   Hassan Ibrahim and Abdul Latif El Boghdadi did not hesitate to say that the Egyptian Air F'orce should per­ form this consignment.  But how?  Egypt was not yet in the Palestine War. Supervision over the Armed Forces, including the Air Force, was close and alert. Yet despair could not penetrate into the details of this plan. A wonderful movement began in the aerodrome of the Air Force.  Tremendous energy for the repair and the preparation of planes was noticeable. Remarkable 'efforts for training and exercise spread like wildfire among the pilots; and very few knew the secret. Those who did, understood that the planes and the pilots were getting ready for the day when a secret signal would come from Syria. They would then fly full out to take part in the decisive battle for the Holy Land. They would proceed to an aerodrome near Damascus, where they would l nd and a.wait the repercussions in Egypt

59
and-hear the echoes of this movement they had embark­ ed upon; after that they would decide which course to take. The most favourable possibility was that every pilot who took part in the operation would be court-mar­
tialled. Many had already planned their lives if circum­ stances stood between them and the return to the Mother Country for a number of years.
   The feeling of the Executive Committee of the Liberal Officers, which was emphatically the feeling entertained by every pilot who took part in this  ring plan, was
neither love of adventure nor a reaction of sentiment. It
wasa  remarkable consciousness \,f our fate, that Rafah
was not the ast boundary of our country and that our sphere of security compelled us to defend the frontiers
of our brethren, with whom we were <.lestined to livetoge,­ ther in one region.
***
   The plan did not materialise then because we did not get  the secret signal from Syria.  Later, circumstances
necessitated that all Arab armies should enter the Pales­ tine War.

   I	do not		want now to discuss the details of the Pales­ tine War.	'nlis is a subject that needs several many­ sided discussions.	But one strange lesson of the Pales­ tine WarI	 will mention: The Arab nations entered the Palestine War with the same degree of enthusiasm. They all shared the same feelings and knew quite well the limits of their security.	They came out of the war with the same bitterness and frustration.	Everyone of them









	



EW.	61

w s	tj:lus exposed, in its own country, to the same 'factor and was governed by the same forces, that caused their defeat and made them bow their p.eads low with shame and humiliation.
   I sat by :myself several times in the trenches and dug­ outs of Iraq-el-Manshia.	I was then the staff-officer of the Sixth Company, which held this sector, defended it sometimes and used it for attack then.
   I used to walk amidst the ruins all around me, whi h, were left after the bombardments of the enemy.	There I travelled far in my imagination.	My voyage took m,e_ to the	sphere of the stars, where 1 would regard the· whole area from my great height above.		The picture lay before me at that time quite clear.	Here was the place where we lay besieged.	There were the posts of our company and those of other companies that shared the same lines with us.	Beyond were the enemy forces surrounding us.	In other places there were other forces of ours besieged also and unable to move, and with room only-to manoeuvre on a small scale.
   The political circumstances prevailing in the capital from which we received our orders threw round us all a. siege more effective and paralysed us more than any­ thing.the enemy could do to us as we lay in Falouga.
   There were also th_e forces of our orothers-in-arms in· the, big Home Land, with a common interest and a com­ mon motive that sent us rushing to the land of Palestine..
Th·-e.. re were the arm. ies of our brethren, wh.ich were also
o r 13:rmies, all besieg ,.	by.\he circUII1Stances that sur-

rounded them and their governments.. They all· seemed like pawns in a game of chess, powerless and without will, except in so far as the hands of players move them.

    All. our nations seemed, beyond our rear-lines, the victims of a tightly-woven conspiracy which deliberately concealed from their eyes the facts of events and mis­ guided them beyond self-recognition.

   From the height of the stars above I used to come down to earth often and feel that I was really defending my home and my children. Neither my dreams, nor the capitals, the states, the peoples, nor history meant any­ thing to me then. This was how I felt when, in my wanderinis, I came upon the children of refugees who were caught in the tentacles of the siege after their homes had been demolished and their property lost. I particularly remember a young girl of the same age as my daughter.  I saw her rushing out, amidst danger and
stray bullets and, bitten by the pangs of hunger and cold, looking for a crust of bread or a rag of cloth. I always said to myself, "This may happen to my daughter." I believe that what was happening in Palestine could hap­ pen, and may still happen today, in any part of this region, as long as it resigns itself to the factors and the
forces which dominate now.

   After the siege and the battles in Palestine I came home with the whole region in my mind one complete whole.  The events that followed confirmed this belief in me.  As I pursued the developments of the situation I found nothing but echoes responding one to the other.








 	








62
iri event may happen in Cairo today; it is repeated in Damascus, Beirut, Amman or any other place tomorrow. 'l'his was naturally in conformity with the picture that
,experience had left within me: One region, the same fac­ tors and circumstances, even the same forces opposing them all. It was clear that imperialism was the most prominent of these forces; even Israel itself was but one of the outcomes of imperialism. If it had not fallen under British mandate Zionism could not have found the neces­ sary support to realise the idea of a national home in Palestine.  That idea would have remaineda  foolish vi­
sion, without hope of realisation.

   As I put  down these impressions, I have before me the memoirs of Chaim Weizmann, the President of the Republic of Israel and its real founder. These memoirs were published in his famous book called "Trial and Error''. They contain certain passages worthy of consi­ deration on account of the particular stamp they bear. I pause at the following: "It was essential," Weizmann wrote, "that a big power should assist us. Th.ere were two great powers in the world who could give us this
assistance: Germany and Britain.

   "As for Germany, it preferred to keep away and avoid any intervention.	Britain was sympathetic and patron-
ising."
   Again I pause as I behold Weizmann saying, "It hap­ pened during the Sixth Zionist Conference which we held in Switzerland  that Hertzel stood declaring that- great

63

Britain only, of all the states of the world, has recognised the Jews as a nation in an independent form and apart from others." "We, the Jews," he continued, "are worthy of having a home and being a state.  Hertzel then read a letter to that effect from Lord Latterson on behalf of the British Government. In this letter Lord Latterson offered us the territory of Uganda to be a National Home. The members of the Conference accepted the offer. After that we suppressed and checkmated this proposal at its early stage and buried it without clamour. Britain again sought to satisfy us.  After this proposal we formed a commission of a considerable number of Jewish savants, who proceeded to Cairo to study the ter ritory of Sinai. There they met Lord Cromer, who sympathised with our aspiration to achieve a national home. Later, I met Lord Balfour, the British Foreign Secretary, who hastened to ask me, 'Why didn't you accept Uganda as a National Home?' I replied that Zionism is a national and political movement is true but the:r:e is also the spiritual side Which we cannot overlook. I am certain that if we ignore the spiritual aspect we shall not be able to realise our political and national vi­ sion. I also asked Balfour, 'What would you do if some­ body would suggest you take Paris instead of London? Would you accept?' "
   I also ponder over another passage in Weizmann. "In the Autumn of 1921 I returned to London where I was called to supervise the drafting of the covenant of the British Mandate in Palestine. The rough draft should have been submitted to the League of Nations in order that it might adopt a resolution upon it.  Afterwards the






	









64
Conference of St. Remo approved the very idea of the Mandate.
"Lord  Curzon  had  then  replaced  Lord Balfour  as
Foreign Secretary and he was responsible for the draft­ ing of the covenant. With us in London then was the Great Jurist Ibn Cohen, one of the ablest authors of Legal Formulae in the world. Eric Adam, Curzon's sec­ retary also cooperated with us.. We hada difference with Curzon,a  difference which was the first and last.
   "We had recorded in the draft of the covenanta clause pledging Britain to the Balfour Declaration and demanding that its policy in Palestine should be on the basis ofa	National Home of the Jews.	The text of the clause we wrote was as follows: 'And the recognition of the historic rights of the Jews in Palestine.'	Curzon pro­ posed that this clause should be toned down so as not to arouse the Arabs when they read it.		He proposed it should read, 'And the recognition of the connections of the Jews and their historic relations with Palestine'."
  I wish to- continue quoting from Weizmann's "Trial and Error," but we know that these old incidents were the first germs of the dreadful repercussions that tore Palestine into shreds and destroyed its very existence.
  I now revert to what I was discussing, namely, that imperialism is the great force that throws around the whole region a fatal siege a hundred times stricter and more cruel than the siege around us in Falouga or a:round our armies and our governments in their capitals, from
where we received our orders.

65

   A:t'ter these facts became established within me, I began to believe in one common struggle and repeat to myself, "As long as the region is one, with its conditions, its problems and its future, and even the enemy is the same, however different are the masks it covers its face with, why should we dissipate our efforts?" The experi­ ence of what followed July 2'3rd increased my faith in a united struggle and its necessity. The secret of the pic­ ture began to reveal itself and the darkness which shrouded its details began to disappear.  ,
   I confess I also began to visualise the great obstacles that blocked the way of a united struggle. But I' also believe that these stumbling blocks should be removed because they are the work of the one and the same ene­ my. I undertook lately a series of political contacts with the object of unifying the struggle whatever might be the means. I came out of these contacts with an impor­ tant result, namely, that the primary obstacle in our path is "suspicion". The seeds of that suspicion were sown in us by the co:mmon enemy in order to stand between us and the united struggle.
   I recollect that one day, I sat talking with an Arab politician and a colleague of his. As he replied to me he turned to his colleague to find out the efforts of his answer before he tried to discover its result on me.  I said to him, "Overcome all suspicion you have and pour out to me all the contents of your heart; look me in the face and regard me in the eye." I do not mean to lighten the obstacles that lie between us and the unification of the struggle.  Some of them are intricate and have roots








66

deep in the environment and the historical and geograph­ ical circumstances which involve them. But is it certain that, with a certain amount of elasticity derived from far-sightedness and not from negligence, we can find the position we should all take without embarrassment or pertinacity in order to face the united struggle.
   I do not hesitate for one moment to mention that our united struggle could achieve for us and our peoples everything we wish and aspi:re to; I shall always go on saying that we are strong but the great catastrophe is that we do not know the extent of our strength.
   We make a mistake in our definition of power. Power is not merely shouting aloud. Power is to act positively with all the components of power.
   When I attempt to analyse the components of our power I cannot help pointing out three principal forces of power which should be the first to be taken into account.
   The first source is that we are a group of neighbour­ ing peoples joined together with sue}?. spiritual and material bonds as join any group of peoples. Our peoples lla,ve traits, components and civilisation, in whose atmo­ sphere the three sacred and heavenly creeds have origin­ ated. This cannot be altogether ignored in any effort at reconstructing a stable world in which peace prevails.
   As for the second source, it is our territory itself and the position it has on the map of the world, that im­ portant strategic situation which can be rightly consider­ ed the meeting-place, the crossroads and the military corridor of the world.



67

   The third source is petroleum, which is the vital nerve of civilisation, without which none of its means can exist, neither huge works for production, nor modes of commu­ nication by land sea and air, nor weapons of war, whether they are planes flying above the clouds or submarines submerged under layers of water.  All these, without
petroleum, would become mere pieces of iron, rusty, mo- tionless and lifeless .	,	., •,·,.
   I_wish I could linger a whil.e ,. nd  discuss petrole,_um. Its existence, as a material fact established by statistics and figures, makes it a worthy model for a discussion of the  importance of the sources of power in our countries.
   I have read lately a treatise published by Chicago University on the state of petroleum. I wish every indi­ vidual of . our people could read it, ponder upon its mean­ ings and give free play to his mind to realise the great significance which lies behind figures and statistics. This treatise shows, for example, that to extract the petrol of Arab countries woud not cost a great deal of money.
   Petrol companies have spent sixty million dollars in Columbia since 1916 and did not find a drop of oil until 1936 . These companies also spent 44 million 9-ollars in Venezuela and did not find a drop of oil until after 15
years.
   These companies again spent 30 million· dollars in the
Dutch East Indies and did not strike oil until very r cently.
!
   The	final result which this treatise proved in this subject is as follows:







 






68
   The capital necessary for extracting one barrel of petrol in the Arab countries is ten cents.  The centre of oil production has shifted from the U.S.A., where oil­ wells have been exhausted, where the price of land is exorbitant, and where wages of workers are high, to Arab territory, where the wells are untouched and ina virgin state, where expensive land can be had for nothing and where labour accepts subsistence wages.

  It isa  fact that half the world's reserve of petroleum is still underground in the Arab regions and the second half is distributed among the U.S.A., Russia, the Carib­ bean and other countries of the world.
   It is also established that the average output of one well of oil per day is as follows:
11 barrels in U.S.A.
230 barrels in Venezuela
4000 barrels in the Arab region.

I	hope I	have  succeeded  in  explaining  clearly  the
degree of importance of this element of power.

   We can consider ourselves, .. therefore, powerful, though not in the loudness of our voices whether we cry, wail, or appeal for help, but powerful when we sit calm and count in figures our capacity for work, powerful in our thorough understanding of the strength of this bond vvhich links us and which makes our territory one.

69

   None of its component p rts could be'isolated from the other-; none could be as independent as· ail . island,
unconnected with the other parts.

   Such is the first circle in which we must revelve and attempt to move as much as we possibly can. It is the Arab circle.
   If we direct our attention after that to the second circle, the circle of the continent of Africa·, 1 would say, without exaggeration, that we cannot, even if we wish to, in any way stand aside, from the sanguinary and dread­ ful struggle now raging in the heart of Africa between five million whites and two hundred million Africans.

   vVe cannot do so for one principal and clear reason, namely that we are in Africa. The people of Africa will continue to look up to us, who guard the northern gate of the continent and who are its connecting link with the world outside. We cannot, under any condition, relin­ quish our responsibility in helping, in every way possible, to diffuse the light of civilisation into the farthest parts of that virgin jungle.

   There 1s another important reason. The Nile is the artery of life of our coun'tr'J.  It draws its supply of water from the heart of the continent.
   There remains the Sudan, our belaved brother, whose 'boundaries extend deeply into Africa  and which·is a
· neighbour to all the sensitive spots in·the centre of the continent.	·







	






7()

   It is a certain fact that Africa at prE::sent is the scene of an exciting ebullition. The white man, representing several European countries, is trying again to repartition. the continent. We cannot stand aside in face of what is taking place in Africa on the assumption that it does not concern or affect us.
I shall continue to dream of the  day  when I see in
.Cairo a great institute for exploring all parts of this con­
,tinent, arousing in our. minds n enlig4t .ning an re'a,l consciousness and contributing with others in the differ­ ent centres of the world, towards the progress and pros­ perity of Africa.
   The third circle now remains: the circle that goes beyond continents and oceans and which I referred to as the circle of our brethren in faith who turn with us, whatever part of the world they are in, towards the same Kibla in Mecca, and whose pious lips whisper reverently the same .pray rs.
   My faith in the positive efficacy which can be the out­ come of further strengthening the Islamic bonds with all other Moslems became deeper when '.I went to the Saudi Kingdom with the Egyptian mission who offered condol­ ences on the death of its late King.

   As I stood in front of the Kaaba and felt my senti­ ments wandering with every part of the world where Islam had extended, I found myself exclaiming, "Our idea of the pilgrimage should change. Going to the Kaaba should never be a passport to heaven after a lengthy lif .


71
 Neither should it be a simple effort to buy indulgences after an eventful life.	The pilgrimage should be a great political power.	The press of the world should follow its news; not as a series of rituals and traditions which are done to amuse and entertain readers, but as a regular political congress wherein the leaders of Moslem states, their public men, their pioneers in every field of know­ ledge, their writers, their leading industrialists, mer­ chants and youth meet to draw up in this universal Islamic Parliament the main lines of policy for their countries and their cooperation together until they meet again.	They should meet reverently, strong, free from greed but active, submissive to the Lord but powerful against their difficulties and their enemies, dreaming of
a		new life, firm believers that they have a place under the sun which they should occupy for life.

   I recall I expressed some of these sentiments to His Majesty Kind Saoud.  He said to me, "This is the real
wisdom of the pilgrimage."	Verily I cannot visualisea higher wisdom.

   When my mind travels to the eighty million Moslems in Indonesia, the fifty million in China and the several other mi11ion in Malaya, Siam and Burma and the hundred million in Pakistan, the hundred million or more in the Middle East and the forty million in Russia, as well as the other millions in the distant parts of the world, when
I		visualise these millions united in one faith, I	havea great consciousness of the tremendous potentialities that cooperation amongst them all can achieve: a cooperation






	










 to their coun• their brethren.



   I now revert to the wandering role that seeks an actor to perform it. Such is the role, such are its features and such is its stage.

.::



  We, and only we, are impelled by our d	.are capable of performing this role.

environment.


























,(







UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN - GEN LIBS

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
3001406683
0--5917 -30-0-1406-6-83---





Printed by "MONDIALE" PRE S, C2ilo.

,,
"


I





- .

\
\



