MY AUTOBIOGRAPHY

From a photograph by A. Badodi, Milan.

MUSSOLINI.
In liis office at the Palazzo Chigi, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. When listening
intently this is his attitude and expression.

My Autobiography
By

Benito Mussolini
With a Foreword by

Richard Washburn Child
Former Ambassador to Italy

Illustrated

NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
1928

COPYRIGHT, 1928, BY CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
Copyright, 1928, by Curtis Publishing Co.

Printed in the United States of America

CONTENTS
PAGE

Foreword

by

Richard Washburn Child ... v

<>it a rriii

I.

A Sulphurous Land........................................................................ 1

II.

My F a t h e r ......................................................................................... 9

III.

T h e Book op L i f e ...........................................................................2 0

IV.

V.
VI.

War

and

Its Effect Upon

a

Man

...

28

A s h e s and Embers............................................................................59
The Death Struggle

of a Worn-Out

Democracy......................................................................................88
VII.

T h e Garden of Fascism................................................................. 121

VIII.

Toward Conquest of Power........................................................... 147

IX.

Thus We Took Rome......................................................................173

X.

Five Years of Government......................................................... 200

XI.

New Paths......................................................................................... 242

Ml.

The Fascist State and the Future .

XIII.

273

En Route........................................................................................... 308
Index....................................................................................................313

ILLUSTRATIONS
Mussolini in his office at the Palazzo Chigi .

.

. Frontispiece
FACING PAGE

The house at Varano di Costa, in Predappio, where Mussolini
was born.................................................................................... 2
Mussolini’s mother and father, Rosa and Alessandro
Mussolini.................................................................................. 10
The first offices, in Milan, of the Popolo d’ltalia, Musso­
lini’s paper............................................................................... 40
A snapshot of Mussolini and his captain on

theCarso, 1916

48

(lommander Gabriele d’Annunzio................................................ 80
King Victor Emmanuel III and Mussolini.................................. 188
Mussolini walking along the seashore, May 1,

1928

.

.

. 204

FOREWORD
By RICHARD

WASHBURN CHILD

It is far from my purpose to elaborate the material
in this book, to interpret it, or to add to it.
With much of the drama it contains I, being Am­
bassador of the United States at the time, was inti­
mately familiar; much of the extraordinary personality
disclosed here was an open book to me long ago because
I knew well the man who now, at last, has written char­
acteristically, directly and simply of that self for which
I have a deep affection.
For his autobiography I am responsible. Lives of
Mussolini written by others have interests of sorts.
“But nothing can take the place of a book which you
will write yourself,” I said to him.
“Write myself?” He leaned across his desk and re­
peated my phrase in amazement.
lie is the busiest single individual in the world. He
appeared hurt as if a friend had failed to understand.
“Yes,” I said and showed him a series of headings I
bad written on a few sheets of paper.
“All right,” he said in English. “I will.”
11 was quite like him. He decides quickly and completcly.
So lie began. He dictated. I advised that method be­
cause when he attempts to write in longhand he corix

X

Foreword

rects and corrects and corrects. It would have been too
much for him. So he dictated. The copy came back and
he interlined the manuscript in his own hand—a dash
of red pencil, and a flowing rivulet of ink—here and
there.
When the manuscripts began to come to me I was
troubled because mere literal translators lose the vigor
of the man himself.
“What editing may I do?” I asked him.
“Any that you like,” he said. “You know Italy, you
understand Fascism, you see me, as clearly as any one.”
But there was nothing much to do. The story came
through as it appears here. It is all his and—what luck
for all of us—so like him! Approve of him or not, when
one reads this book one may know Mussolini or at least,
if one’s vision is clouded, know him better. Like the
book or not, there is not an insincere line in it. I find
none.
Of course there are many things which a man writing
an autobiography cannot see about himself or will not
say about himself.
He is unlikely to speak of his own size on the screen
of history.
Perhaps when approval or disapproval, theories and
isms, pros and cons, are all put aside the only true mea­
sure of a man’s greatness from a wholly unpartisan
view-point may be found in the answer to this ques­
tion:
“How deep and lasting has been the effect of a man
upon the largest number of human beings—their hearts,

Foreword

xi

their thoughts, their material welfare, their relation to
the universe?”
In our time it may be shrewdly forecast that no man
will exhibit dimensions of permanent greatness equal to
those of Mussolini.
Admire him or not, approve his philosophies or not,
concede the permanence of his success or not, consider
him superman or not, as you may, he has put to a work­
ing test, on great and growing numbers of mankind,
programmes, unknown before, in applied spirituality,
in applied plans, in applied leadership, in applied doc­
trines, in the applied principle that contents are more
important than labels on bottles. He has not only been
able to secure and hold an almost universal following;
he has built a new state upon a new concept of a state.
He has not only been able to change the lives of human
beings but he has changed their minds, their hearts,
their spirits. He has not merely ruled a house; he has
built a new house.
He has not merely put it on paper or into orations; he
has laid the bricks.
It is one thing to administer a state. The one who does
this well is called statesman. It is quite another thing to
make a state. Mussolini has made a state. That is super­
statesmanship.
I knew him before the world at large, outside of
Italy, had ever heard of him; I knew him before and
after the moment he leaped into the saddle and in the
days when he, almost single-handed, was clearing away
chaos’ own junk pile from Italy.

xii

Foreword

But no man knows Mussolini. An Italian newspaper
offered a prize for the best essay showing insight into
the mystery of the man. Mussolini, so the story goes,
stopped the contest by writing to the paper that such a
competition was absurd, because he himself could not
enter an opinion.
In spite of quick, firm decisions, in spite of grim de­
termination, in spite of a well-ordered diagrammed pat­
tern and plan of action fitted to any moment of time,
Mussolini, first of all, above all and after all, is a per­
sonality always in a state of flux, adjusting its leader­
ship to a world eternally in a state of flux.
Change the facts upon which Mussolini has acted and
he will change his action. Change the hypotheses and
he will change his conclusion.
And this perhaps is an attribute of greatness seldom
recognized. Most of us are forever hoping to put our
world in order and finish the job. Statesmen with some
idea to make over into reality hope for a day when they
can say: “Well, that’s done!” And when it is done,—
often enough it is nothing. The bridges they have built
are now useless, because the rivers have all changed
their courses and humanity is already shrieking for new
bridges. This is not an unhappy thought, says Musso­
lini. A finished world would be a stupid place—intol­
erably stupid.
The imagination of mere statesmen covers a static
world.
The imagination of true greatness covers a dynamic
world. Mussolini conceives a dynamic world. He is

Foreword

xiii

ready to go on the march with it, though it overturns all
his structures, upsets all his theories, destroys all of yes­
terday and creates a screaming dawn of a to-morrow.
Opportunist is a term of reproach used to brand men
who fit themselves to conditions for reasons of self-in­
terest. Mussolini, as I have learned to know him, is an
opportunist in the sense that he believes that mankind
itself must be fitted to changing conditions rather than
to fixed theories, no matter how many hopes and prayers
have been expended on theories and programmes.
He has marched up several hills with the thousands
and then marched down again. This strange creature of
strange life and strange thoughts, with that almost psy­
chopathic fire which was in saints and villains, in Na­
poleons, in Jeanne d’Arcs and in Tolstoys, in religious
prophets and in Ingersolls, has been up the Socialist,
the international, the liberal and the conservative hills
and down again. He says: “The sanctity of an ism is not
in the ism; it has no sanctity beyond its power to do, to
work, to succeed in practice. It may have succeeded yes­
terday and fail to-morrow. Failed yesterday and suc­
ceed to-morrow. The machine first of all must run!”
I have watched, with a curiosity that has never failed
to creep in on me, the marked peculiarities, physical
and mental, of this man. At moments he is quite re­
laxed, at ease; and yet the unknown gusts of his own
personality play on him eternally. One sees in his eyes,
or in a quick movement of his body, or in a sentence
suddenly ejaculated, the effect of these gusts, just as
one sees wind on the surface of the water.

xiv

Foreword

There is in his walk something of a prowl, a faint
suggestion of the tread of the cat. He likes cats—their
independence, their decision, their sense of justice and
their appreciation of the sanctity of the individual. He
even likes lions and lionesses, and plays with them until
those who guard his life protest against their social set.
His principal pet is a Persian feline which, being of
aristocratic lineage, nevertheless exhibits a pride not
only of ancestry but, condescendingly, of belonging to
Mussolini. And yet, in spite of his own prowl, as he
walks along in his riding-boots, springy, active, ready
to leap, it seems, there is little else feline about him.
One quality is feline, however—it is the sense of his
complete isolation. One feels that he must always have
had this isolation—isolation as a boy, isolation as a
young radical, adventurer, lover, worker, thinker.
There is no understudy of Mussolini. There is no
man, woman, or child who stands anywhere in the inner
orbit of his personality. No one. The only possible ex­
ception is his daughter Edda. All the tales of his al­
liances, his obligations, his ties, his predilections are
arrant nonsense. There are none—no ties, no predilec­
tions, no alliances, no obligations unpaid.
Financially? Lying voices said that he had been per­
sonally financed and backed by the industrialists of
Italy. This is ridiculous to those who know. His salary
is almost nothing. His own family—wife, children, are
poor.
Politically? Whom could he owe? He has made and
can unmake them all. He is free to test every officeholder

Foreword

XV

in the whole of Italy by the yardstick of service and fit­
ness. Beyond that I know not one political debt that he
owes. He has tried to pay those of the past; I believe
that the cynicism in him is based upon the failure of
some who have been rewarded to live up to the trust put
in them.
“But I take the responsibility for all,” says he. He
says it publicly with jaws firm; he says it privately
with eyes somewhat saddened.
He takes responsibility for everything—for disci­
pline, for censorship, for measures which, were less rigor
required, would appear repressive and cruel. “Mine!”
says he, and stands or falls on that. It is an admirable
courage. I could, if I wished, quote instance after in­
stance of this acceptance—sometimes when he is not to
blame—of the whole responsibility of the machine.
“Mine!” says he.
And in spite of any disillusionment he has suffered
since I knew him first, he has retained his laugh—often,
one is bound to say, a scornful laugh—and he has kept
his faith in an ability to build up a machine—the ma­
chine of Fascism—the machine built not on any fixed
theory but one intended by Mussolini to run—above all,
to run, to function, to do, to accomplish, to fill the bot­
tles with wine first, unlike the other isms, and put the
labels on after.
Mussolini has superstitious faith in himself. He has
said it. Not a faith in himself to make a personal gain.
An assassin’s bullet might wipe him out and leave his
family in poverty. That would be that. His faith is in

xvi

Foreword

a kind of destiny which will allow him, before the last
chapter, to finish the building of this new state, this
new machine—“the machine which will run and has a
soul.”
The first time I ever saw him he came to my residence
sometime before the march on Rome and I asked him
what would be his programme for Italy. His answer
was immediate: “Work and discipline.”
I remember I thought at that time that the phrase
sounded a little evangelical, a phrase of exhortation.
But a mere demagogue would never choose it. Wilson’s
slogans of Rights and Peace and Freedom are much
more popular and gain easier currency than sterner
phrases. It is easier even for a sincere preacher, to offer
soft nests to one’s followers; it is more difficult to excite
enthusiasm for stand-up doctrines. Any analysis and
weighing of Mussolini’s greatness must include recog­
nition that he has made popular throughout a race of
people, and perhaps for others, a standard of obligation
of the individual not only exacting but one which in the
end will be accepted voluntarily. Not only is it accepted
voluntarily but with an almost spiritual ecstasy which
has held up miraculously in Italy during years, when
all the so-called liberals in the world were hovering over
it like vultures, croaking that if it were not dead it was
about to die.
It is difficult to lead men at all. It is still more diffi­
cult to lead them away from self-indulgence. It is still
more difficult to lead them so that a new generation, so
that youth itself, appears as if bora with a new spirit,

Foreword

xvii

a new virility bred in the bones. It is difficult to govern
a state and difficult to deal cleanly and strongly with a
static programme applied to a static world; but it is
more difficult to build a new state and deal cleanly and
strongly with a dynamic programme applied to a dy­
namic world.
This man, who looks up at me with that peculiar nod­
ding of his bead and raising of the eyebrows, has done
it. There arc Jew in the world’s history who have. I had
considered the phrase “Work and discipline” as a
worthy slogan, as a good label for an empty bottle.
Within six years this man, with a professional opposi­
tion which first barked like Pomeranians at his heels
and then ran away to bark abroad, has made the label
good, has filied the bottle, has turned concept into re­
ality.
It is quite possible for those who oppose the concept
to say that the reality of the new spirit of Italy and its
extenl of liill acceptance by the people may exist in the
mind of Mussolini, but does not spring out of the people
themselves hut it is quite untrue as all know who really
know.
He throws up his somewhat stubby, meaty, shortfingered hands, strong and yet rather ghostlike when
one touches them, and laughs. Like Roosevelt. No one
can spend much time with him without thinking that
after all I here are two kinds of leaders—outdoor and
indoor leaders—and that the first are somewhat more
magnetic, more lasting and more boyish and likable for
their power than the indoor kind.

xviii

Foreword

Mussolini, like Roosevelt, gives the impression of an
energy which cannot be bottled, which bubbles up and
over like an eternally effervescent, irrepressible fluid.
At these moments one remembers his playing of the
violin, his fencing, his playful, mischievous humour, the
dash of his courage, his contact with animals, his suc­
cess in making gay marching songs for the old drab
struggles of mankind with the soil, with the elements,
with ores in the earth, and the pathways of the seas. In
the somber conclusions of the student statesman and in
the sweetness of the sentimentalist statesman there is
little joy; unexpected joy is found in the leadership of
a Mussolini. Battle becomes a game. The game becomes
a romp. It is absurd to say that Italy groans under dis­
cipline. Italy chortles with it! It is victory!
He is a Spartan too. Perhaps we need them in the
world to-day; especially that type whose first interest is
the development of the power and the happiness of a
race.
The last time I took leave of Mussolini he came
prowling across the room as I went toward the door.
His scowl had gone. The evening had come. There had
been a half hour of quiet conversation. The strained ex­
pression had fallen from his face. He came toward me
and rubbed his shoulder against the wall. He was re­
laxed and quiet.
I remembered Lord Curzon’s impatience with him
long ago, when Mussolini had first come into power, and
Curzon used to refer to him as “that absurd man.”
Time has shown that he was neither violent nor ah-

Foreword

xix

surd. Time has shown that he is both wise and humane.
It takes the world a long time to see what has been
dropped into the pan of its old scales!
In terms of fundamental and permanent effect upon
the largest number of human beings—whether one ap­
proves or detests him—the Duce is now the greatest
ligure of this sphere and time. One closes the door when
one leaves him, feeling, as when Roosevelt was left, that
one could squeeze something of him out of one’s clothes.
He is a mystic to himself.
I imagine, as he reaches forth to touch reality in him­
self, he finds that he himself has gone a little forward,
isolated, determined, illusive, untouchable, just out of
reach—onward!

MY AUTOBIOGRAPHY

A SULPHUROUS LAND

HOST all the books published about me put
squarely and logically on the first page that
which may be called my birth certificate. It
is usually taken from my own notes.
Well, then here it is again. I was born on July 29,
1883, at Varano di Costa. This is an old hamlet. It is
on a hill. The houses are of stone, and sunlight and
shade give these walls and roofs a variegated color
which I well remember. The hamlet, where the air is
pure and the view agreeable, overlooks the village of
Dovia, and Dovia is in the commune, or county, of Predappio in the northeast of Italy.
It was at two o’clock Sunday afternoon when I came
into the world. It was by chance the festival day of the
patron saint of the old church and parish of Caminate.
On the structure a ruined tower overlooks proudly and
solemnly the whole plain of Forli—a plain which slopes
gently down from the Apennines, with their snow-clad
tops in winter, to the undulating bottoms of Ravaldino,
where the mists gather in summer nights.
Let me add to the atmosphere of a country dear to
me by bringing again to my memory the old district of
Predappio. It was a country well known in the thir­

2

My Autobiography

teenth century, giving birth to illustrious families dur­
ing the Renaissance. It is a sulphurous land. From it
the ripening grapes make a strong wine of fine perfume.
There are many springs of iodine waters. And on that
plain and those undulating foothills and mountain
spurs, the ruins of mediceval castles and towers thrust
up their gray-yellow walls toward the pale blue sky in
testimony of the virility of centuries now gone.
Such was the land, dear to me because it was my soil.
Race and soil are strong influences upon us all.
As for my race—my origin—many persons have
studied and analyzed its hereditary aspects. There is
nothing very difficult in tracing my genealogy, because
from parish records it is very easy for friendly research
to discover that I came from a lineage of honest peo­
ple. They tilled the soil, and because of its fertility they
earned the right to their share of comfort and ease.
Going further back, one finds that the Mussolini
family was prominent in the city of Bologna in the thir­
teenth century. In 1270 Giovanni Mussolini was the
leader of this warlike, aggressive commune. His part­
ner in the rule of Bologna in the days of armored
knights was Fulcieri Paolucci de Calboli, who belonged
to a family from Predappio also, and even to-day that
is one of the distinguished families.
The destinies of Bologna and the internal struggles
of its parties and factions, following the eternal con­
flicts and changes in all struggles for power, caused, at
last, the exile of the Mussolinis to Argelato. From there
they scattered into neighboring provinces. One may be

The house at Varano di Costa, in Predappio, where Mussolini was born.

A Sulphurous Land

3

sure that in that era their adventures were varied and
sometimes in the flux of fortune brought them to hard
times. I have never discovered news of my forbears in
the seventeenth century. In the eighteenth century there
was a Mussolini in London. Italians never hesitate to
venture abroad with their genius or their labors. The
London Mussolini was a composer of music of some
note and perhaps it is from him that I inherit the love
of the violin, which even to-day in my hands gives com­
fort to moments of relaxation and creates for me mo­
ments of release from the realities of my days.
Later, in the nineteenth century, the family tie be­
came more clearly defined; my own grandfather was a
lieutenant of the National Guard.
My father was a blacksmith—a heavy man with
strong, large, fleshy hands. Alessandro the neighbors
called him. Heart and mind were always filled and
pulsing with socialistic theories. His intense sympathies
mingled with doctrines and causes. He discussed them
in the evening with his friends and his eyes filled with
light. The international movement attracted him and
he was closely associated with names known among the
followers of social causes in Italy—Andrea Costa, Balducci, Amilcare, Cipriani and even the more tender and
pastoral spirit of Giovanni Pascoli. So come and go
men whose minds and souls are striving for good ends.
Each conference seems to them to touch the fate of the
world; each talisman seems to promise salvation; each
theory pretends to immortality.
The Mussolinis had left some permanent marks. In

4

My Autobiography

Bologna there is still a street named for that family
and not long ago a tower and a square bore the name.
Somewhere in the heraldic records there is the Mussolini
coat of arms. It has a rather pleasing and perhaps mag­
nificent design. There are six black figures in a yellow
field—symbols of valor, courage, force.
My childhood, now in the mists of distance, still yields
those flashes of memory that come back with a familiar
scene, an aroma which the nose associates with damp
earth after a rain in the springtime, or the sound of
footsteps in the corridor. A roll of thunder may bring
back the recollection of the stone steps where a little
child who seems no longer any part of oneself used to
play in the afternoon.
Out of those distant memories I receive no assurance
that I had the characteristics which are supposed tra­
ditionally to make parents overjoyed at the perfection
of their offspring. I was not a good boy, nor did I stir
the family pride or the dislike of my own young asso­
ciates in school by standing at the head of my class.
I was then a restless being; I am still.
Then I could not understand why it is necessary to
take time in order to act. Rest for restfulness meant
nothing to me then any more than now.
I believe that in those youthful years, just as now, my
day began and ended with an act of will—by will put
into action.
Looking back, I cannot see my early childhood as
being either praiseworthy or as being more than normal
in every direction. I remember my father as a dark­

A Sulphurous Land

5

haired, good-natured man, not slow to laugh, with
strong features and steady eyes. I remember that near
the house where I was bom, with its stone wall with
moss green in the crevices, there was a small brook and
farther on a little river. Neither had much water in it,
but in autumn and other seasons when there were unex­
pected heavy rains they swelled in fury and their tor­
rents were joyous challenges to me. I remember them
as my first play spots. With my brother, Arnaldo, who
is now the publisher of the daily Popolo d’Italia, I used
to try my skill as a builder of dams to regulate the cur­
rent. When birds were in their nesting season I was a
frantic hunter for their concealed and varied homes
with their eggs or young birds. Vaguely I sensed in all
this the rhythm of natural progress—a peep into a
world of eternal wonder, of flux and change. I was pas­
sionately fond of young life; I wished to protect it then
as I do now.
My greatest love was for my mother. She was so
quiet, so tender, and yet so strong. Her name was Rosa.
My mother not only reared us but she taught primary
school. I often thought, even in my earliest apprecia­
tion of human beings, of how faithful and patient her
work was. To displease her was my one fear. So, to hide
from her my pranks, my naughtiness or some result of
mischievous frolic, I used to enlist my grandmother and
even the neighbors, for they understood my panic lest
my mother should be disturbed.
The alphabet was my first practice in worldly af­
fairs and I learned it in a rush of enthusiasm. Without

6

My Autobiography

knowing why, I found myself wishing to attend school
—the school at Predappio, some two miles away. It was
taught by Marani, a friend of my father. I walked to
and fro and was not displeased that the boys of Pre­
dappio resented at first the coming of a stranger boy
from another village. They flung stones at me and I re­
turned their fire. I was all alone and against many. I
was often beaten, but I enjoyed it with that universal­
ity of enjoyment with which boys the world around
make friendship by battle and arrive at affection
through missiles. Whatever was my courage, my body
bore its imprints. I concealed the bruises from my
mother to shelter her from the knowledge of the world
in which I had begun to find expression and to which I
supposed she was such a stranger. At the evening re­
past I probably often feared to stretch out my hand
for the bread lest I expose a wound upon my young
wrist.
After a while this all ended. War was over and the
pretense of enmity—a form of play—faded into noth­
ing and I had found fine schoolmates of my own age.
The call of old life foundations is strong. I felt it
when only a few years ago a terrific avalanche endan­
gered the lives of the inhabitants of Predappio. I took
steps to found a new Predappio—Predappio Nuovo.
My nature felt a stirring for my old home. And I re­
membered that as a child I had sometimes looked at the
plain where the River Rabbi is crossed by the old high­
way to Mendola and imagined there a flourishing town.
To-day that town—Predappio Nuovo—is in full proc­

A Sulphurous Land

7

ess of development; on its masonry gate there is carved
the symbol of Fascism and words expressing my clear
will.
When I was graduated from the lower school I was
sent to a boarding school. This was at Faenza, the town
noted for its pottery of the fifteenth century. The school
was directed by the Salesiani priests. I was about to
enter into a period of routine, of learning the ways of
the disciplined human herd. I studied, slept well and
grew. I was awake at daylight and went to bed when
the evening had settled down and the bats flew.
This was a period of bursting beyond the bounds of
my own little town. I had begun to travel. I had begun
to add length after length to that tether which binds
one to the hearth and the village.
I saw the town of Forli—a considerable place which
should have impressed me but failed to do so. But Ra­
venna ! Some of my mother’s relatives lived in the plain
of Ravenna and on one summer vacation we set out
together to visit them. After all, it was not far away,
but to my imagination it was a great journey—almost
like a journey of Marco Polo—to go over hill and dale
to the edge of the sea—the Adriatic!
I went with my mother to Ravenna and carefully vis­
ited every corner of that city steeped in the essences of
antiquity. From the wealth of Ravenna’s artistic trea­
sures there rose before me the beauty and fascination
of her history and her name through the long centuries.
Deep feelings remain now, impressed then upon me. I
experienced a profound and significant enlarging of

8

My Autobiography

my concepts of life, beauty and the rise of civilizations.
The tomb of Dante, inspiring in its quiet hour of noon;
the basilica of San Apollinare; the Candiano canal,
with the pointed sails of fishing-boats at its mouth; and
then the beauty of the Adriatic moved me—touched
something within me.
I went back witli something new and undying. My
mind and sj^irit were filled with expanding conscious­
ness. And I took back also a present from my relatives.
It was a wild duck, powerful in flight. My brother Arnaldo and I, on the little river at home, put forth patient
efforts to tame the wild duck.

CHAPTER II

MY FATHER

M

Y father took a profound interest in my devel­
opment. Perhaps I was much more observed
by his paternal attention than I thought. We
became much more knit together by common interests
as my mind and body approached maturity. In the first
place I became fascinated by the steam threshing ma­
chines which were just then for the first time being in­
troduced into our agricultural life. With my father I
went to work to learn the mechanism, and tasted, as I
had never tasted before, the quiet joy of becoming a part
of the working creative world. Machinery has its fasci­
nations and I can understand how an engineer of a rail­
way locomotive or an oiler in the hold of a ship may feel
that a machine has a personality, sometimes irritating,
sometimes friendly, with an inexhaustible generosity
and helpfulness, power and wisdom.
But manual labor in my father’s blacksmith shop was
not the only common interest we shared. It was inevi­
table that I should find a clearer understanding of those
political and social questions which in the midst of dis­
cussions with the neighbors had appeared to me as un­
fathomable, and hence a stupid world of words. I could
not follow as a child the arguments of lengthy debates
9

10

My Autobiography

around the table, nor did I grasp the reasons for the
watchfulness and measures taken by the police. But now
in an obscure way it all appeared as connected with the
lives of strong men who not only dominate their own
lives but also the lives of their fellow creatures. Slowly
but fatally I was turning my spirit and my mind to new
political ideals destined to flower for a time.
I began with young eyes to see that the tiny world
about me was feeling uneasiness under the pinch of ne­
cessity. A deep and secret grudge was darkening the
hearts of the common people. A country gentry of
mediocrity in economic usefulness and of limited intel­
lectual contribution were hanging upon the multitudes
a weight of unjustified privileges. These were sad, dark
years not only in my own province but for other parts
of Italy. I must have the marks upon my memory of
the resentful and furtive protests of those who came to
talk with my father, some with bitterness of facts, some
with a newly devised hope for some reform.
It was then, while I was still in my early teens, that
my parents, after many serious talks, ending with a
rapid family counsel, turned the rudder of my destiny
in a new direction. They said that my manual work did
not correspond to their ambitions for me, to their ability
to aid me, nor did it fit my own capacities. My mother
had a phrase which remains in my ears: “He promises
something.”
At the time I was not very enthusiastic about that
conclusion; I had no real hunger for scholastic endeavor.
I did not feel that I would languish if I did not go to a

From a photograph by A. Badodi, Milan.

Mussolini’s mother and father, Rosa and Alessandro Mussolini.

My Father

11

normal school and did not prepare to become a teacher.
But my family were right. I had developed some ca­
pacities as a student and could increase them.
I went to the normal school at a place called Forlimpopoli. I remember my arrival in that small city.
The citizens were cheerful and industrious, good at bar­
gaining—tradesmen and middlemen. The school, how­
ever, had a greater distinction; it was conducted by Valfredo Carducci, brother of the great writer Giosue Carducci, who at that time was harvesting his laurels be­
cause of his poetry and his inspiration drawn from Ro­
man classicism.
There was a long stretch of study ahead of me; to be­
come a master—to have a teacher’s diploma—meant six
years of books and pencils, ink and paper. I confess
that I was not very assiduous. The bright side of those
years of preparation to be a teacher came from my in­
terest in reforming educational methods, and even more
in an interest begun at that time and maintained ever
since, an intense interest in the psychology of human
masses—the crowd.
I was, I believe, unruly; and I was sometimes indis­
creet. Youth has its passing restlessness and follies.
Somehow I succeeded in gaining forgiveness. My mas­
ters were understanding and on the whole generous. But
I have never been able to make up my mind how much
of the indulgence accorded to me came from any hope
they had in me or how much came from the fact that my
father had acquired an increasing reputation for his
moral and political integrity.

12

My Autobiography

So the diploma came to me at last. I was a teacher!
Many are the men who have found activity in political
life who began as teachers. But then I saw only the pros­
pect of the hard road of job hunting, letters of recom­
mendation, scraping up a backing of influential persons
and so on.
In a competition for a teacher’s place at Gualtieri, in
the province of lteggio Emilia, I was successful. I had
my taste of it. I taught for a year. On the last day of
the school year I dictated an essay. I remember its the­
sis. It was: “By Persevering You Arrive.” For that I
obtained the praise of my superiors.
So school was closed. I did not want to go back to my
family. There was a narrow world for me, with affec­
tion to be sure, but restricted. There in Predappio one
could neither move nor think without feeling at the end
of a short rope. I had become conscious of myself, sen­
sitive to my future. I felt the urge to escape.
Money I had not—merely a little. Courage was my
asset. I would be an exile. I crossed the frontier; I en­
tered Switzerland.
It was in this wander-life, now full of difficulties, toil,
hardship and restlessness, that developed something in
me. It was the milestone which marked my maturity. I
entered into this new era as a man and politician. My
confident soul began to be my support. I conceded noth­
ing to pious demagoguery. I allowed myself, humble as
was my figure, to be guided by my innate proudness and
I saw myself in my own mental dress.
To this day I thank difficulties. They were more nu­

My Father

13

merous than the nice, happy incidents. But the latter
gave me nothing. The difficulties of life have hardened
my spirit. They have taught me how to live.
For me it would have been dreadful and fatal if on
my journey forward I had by chance fallen perma­
nently into the chains of comfortable bureaucratic em­
ployment. How could I have adapted myself to that
smug existence in a world bristling with interest and
significant horizons? How could I have tolerated the
halting progress of promotions, comforted and yet irri­
tated by the thoughts of an old-age pension at the end
of the dull road? Any comfortable cranny would have
sapped my energies. These energies which I enjoy were
trained by obstacles and even by bitterness of soid.
They were made by struggle, not by the joys of the
pathway.
My stay in Switzerland was a welter of difficulties. It
did not last long, but it was angular, with harsh points.
I worked with skill as a laborer. I worked usually as a
mason and felt the fierce, grim pleasure of construction.
I made translations from Italian into French and vice
versa. I did whatever came to hand. I looked upon my
friends with interest or affection or amusement.
Above all, I threw myself headforemost into the poli­
tics of the emigrant—of refugees, of those who sought
solutions.
In politics I never gained a penny. I detest those who
live like parasites, sucking away at the edges of social
struggles. I hate men who grow rich in politics.
I knew hunger—stark hunger—in those days. But I

14

My Autobiography

never bent myself to ask for loans and I never tried to
inspire the pity of those around me, nor of my own po­
litical companions. I reduced my needs to a minimum
and that minimum—and sometimes less—I received
from home.
With a kind of passion, I studied social sciences.
Pareto was giving a course of lectures in Lausanne on
political economy. I looked forward to every one. The
mental exercise was a change from manual labor. My
mind leaped toward this change and I found plea­
sure in learning. For here was a teacher who was out­
lining the fundamental economic philosophy of the fu­
ture.
Between one lesson and another I took part in po­
litical gatherings. I made speeches. Some intemperance
in my words made me undesirable to the Swiss authori­
ties. They expelled me from two cantons. The univer­
sity courses were over. I was forced into new places, and
not until 1922 at the Conference of Lausanne, after I
was Premier of Italy, did I see again some of my old
haunts, filled with memories colorful or drab.
To remain in Switzerland became impossible. There
was the yearning for home which blossoms in the hearts
of all Italians. Furthermore, the compulsory service in
the army was calling me. I came back. There were greet­
ings, questions, all the incidents of the return of an ad­
venturer—and then I joined the regiment—a Bersaglieri regiment at the historic city of Verona. The Bersaglieri wear green cock feathers in their hats; they are
famous for their fast pace, a kind of monotonous and

My Father

15

ground-covering dogtrot, and for their discipline and
spirit.
I liked the life of a soldier. The sense of willing sub­
ordination suited my temperament. I was preceded by
a reputation of being restless, a fire eater, a radical, a
revolutionist. Consider then the astonishment of the
captain, the major, and my colonels, who were com­
pelled to speak of me with praise! It was my opportu­
nity to show serenity of spirit and strength of character.
Verona, where my regiment was garrisoned, was and
always will remain a dear Venetian city, reverberating
with the past, filled with suggestive beauties. It found in
my own temperament an echo of infinite resonance. I
enjoyed its aromas as a man, but also as a private sol­
dier I entered with vim into all the drills and the most
difficult exercises. I found an affectionate regard for the
mass, for the whole, made up of individuals, for its ma­
neuvers and the tactics, the practice of defense and
attack.
My capacity was that of a simple soldier; but I used
to weigh the character, abilities and individualities of
those who commanded me. All Italian soldiers to a cer­
tain extent do this. I learned in that way how important
it is for an officer to have a deep knowledge of military
matters and to develop a fine sensitiveness to the ranks,
and to appreciate in the masses of our men our stem
Latin sense of discipline and to be susceptible to its en­
chantments.
I can say that in every regard I was an excellent sol­
dier. I might have taken up the courses for noncommis­

16

My Autobiography

sioned officers. But destiny, which dragged me from my
father’s blacksmith shop to teaching and from teaching
to exile and from exile to discipline, now decreed that I
should not become a professional soldier. I had to ask
for leave. At the time I swallowed the greatest sorrow
in my life; it was the death of my mother.
One day my captain took me aside. He was so con­
siderate that I felt in advance something impending.
He asked me to read a telegram. It was from my father.
My mother was dying! He urged my return. I rushed
to catch the first train.
I arrived too late. My mother was in death’s agony.
But from an almost imperceptible nod of her head I
realized that she knew I had come. I saw her endeavor
to smile. Then her head slowly drooped and she had
gone.
All the independent strength of my soul, all my in­
tellectual or philosophical resources—even my deep re­
ligious beliefs—were helpless to comfort that great
grief. For many days I was lost. From me had been
taken the one dear and truly near living being, the one
soul closest and eternally adherent to my own responses.
Words of condolence, letters from my friends, the at­
tempt to comfort me by other members of the family,
filled not one tiny corner of that great void, nor opened
even one fraction of an inch of the closed door.
My mother had suffered for me—in so many ways.
She had lived so many hours of anxiety for me because
of my wandering and pugnacious life. She had pre­
dicted my ascent. She had toiled and hoped too much

My Father

17

and died before she was yet forty-eight years old. She
had, in her quiet manner, done superhuman labors.
She might be alive now. She might have lived and en­
joyed, with the power of her maternal instinct, my po­
litical success. It was not to be. But to me it is a com­
fort to feel that she, even now, can see me and help me
in my labors with her unequaled love.
I, alone, returned to the regiment. I finished my last
months of military service. And then my life and my
future were again distended with uncertainty.
I went to Opeglia as a teacher again, knowing all the
time that teaching did not suit me. This time I was a
master in a middle school. After a period, off I went
with Cesare Battisti, then chief editor of the Popolo.
Later he was destined to become one of the greatest of
our national heroes—he who gave his life, he who was
executed by the enemy Austrians in the war, he who then
was giving his thought and will to obtaining freedom of
the province of Trento from the rule of Austria. His
nobility and proud soul are always in my memory. His
aspirations as a socialist-patriot called to me.
One day I wrote an article maintaining that the Ital­
ian border was not at Ala, the little town which in those
days stood on the old frontier between our kingdom and
the old Austria. Whereupon I was expelled from Aus­
tria by the Imperial and Royal Government of Vienna.
I was becoming used to expulsions. Once more a wan­
derer, I went back to Forli.
The itch of journalism was in me. My opportunity
was before me in the editorship of a local socialist news­

18

My Autobiography

paper. I understood now that the Gordian knot of Ital­
ian political life could only be undone by an act of vio­
lence.
Therefore I became the public crier of this basic, par­
tisan, warlike conception. The time had come to shake
the souls of men and fire their minds to thinking and
acting. It was not long before I was proclaimed the
mouthpiece of the intransigent revolutionary socialist
faction. I was only twenty-nine years old when at Reg­
gio Emilia at the Congress in 1912, two years before the
World War began, I was nominated as director of the
Avanti. It was the only daily of the socialist cause and
was published in Milan.
I lost my father just before I left for my new office.
He was only fifty-seven. Nearly forty of those years
had been spent in politics. His was a rectangular mind,
a wise spirit, a generous heart. He had looked into the
eyes of the first internationalist agitators and philoso­
phers. He had been in prison for his ideas.
The Romagna—that part of Italy from which we all
came—a spirited district with traditions of a struggle
for freedom against foreign oppressions—knew my
father’s merit. He wrestled year in and year out with
endless difficulties and he had lost the small family
patrimony by helping friends who had gone beyond their
depth in the political struggle.
Prestige he had among all those who came into con­
tact with him. The best political men of his day liked him
and respected him. He died poor. I believe his fore­
most desire was to live to see his sons correctly estimated
by public opinion.

My Father

19

At the end he understood at last that the old eternal
traditional forces such as capital could not he perma­
nently overthrown by a political revolution. He turned
his attention at the end toward bettering the souls of in­
dividuals. He wanted to make mankind true of heart
and sensitive to fraternity. Many were the speeches and
articles about him after his death; three thousand of the
men and women he had known followed his body to the
grave. My father’s death marked the end of family
unity for us, the family.

CHAPTER III

THE BOOK OF LIFE

PLUNGED forward into big politics when I set­
tled in Milan at the head of the Avanti. My brother
Arnaldo went on with his technical studies and my
sister Edvige, having the offer of an excellent marriage,
went to live with her husband in a little place in Ro­
magna called Premilcuore. Each one of us took up for
himself the torn threads of the family. We were sepa­
rated, but in touch. We did not reunite again, however,
until August 1914, when we met to discuss politics and
war. War had come—war—that female of dreads and
fascinations.
Up till then I had worked hard to build up the cir­
culation, the influence and the prestige of the Avanti.
After some months the circulation had increased to more
than one hundred thousand.
I then had a dominant situation in the party. But I
can say that I did not yield an inch to demagoguery. I
have never flattered the crowd, nor wheedled any one;
I spoke always of the costs of victories—sacrifice and
sweat and blood.
I was living most modestly with my family, with my
wife Rachele, wise and excellent woman who has fol­
lowed me with patience and devotion across all the wide

1

20

The Book of Life

21

vicissitudes of my life. My daughter Edda was then the
joy of our home. We had nothing to want. I saw myself
in the midst of fierce struggle, but my family did repre­
sent and always has represented to me an oasis of se­
curity and refreshing calm.
Those years before the World War were filled by
political twists and turns. Italian life was not easy. Dif­
ficulties were many for the people. The conquest of
Tripolitania had exacted its toll of lives and money in
a measure far beyond our expectation. Our lack of po­
litical understanding brought at least one riot a week.
During one ministry of Giolitti I remember thirty-three.
They had their harvest of killed and wounded and of
corroding bitterness of heart. Riots and upheavals
among day laborers, among the peasants in the valley
of the Po, riots in the south—even separatist movements
in our islands. And in the meantime, above all this atro­
phy of normal life, there went on the tournament and
joust of political parties struggling for power.
I thought then, as I think now, that only the common
denominator of a great sacrifice of blood could have
restored to all the Italian nation an equalization of
rights and duties. The attempt at revolution—the Red
Week—was not revolution as much as it was chaos. No
leaders! No means to go on! The middle class and the
bourgeoisie gave us another picture of their insipid
spirit.
We were in June then, picking over our own affairs
with a microscope.
Suddenly the murder of Serajevo came from the blue.

22

My Autobiography

In July—the war.
Up till that event my progress had been somewhat
diverse, my growth of capacity somewhat varied. In
looking back one has to weigh the effect upon one of
various influences commonly supposed powerful.
It is a general conviction that good or bad friends can
decisively alter the course of a personality. Perhaps it
may be true for those fundamentally weak in spirit
whose rudders are always in the hands of other steers­
men. During my life, I believe, neither my school
friends, my war friends, nor my political friends ever
had the slightest influence upon me. I have listened al­
ways with intense interest to their words, their sugges­
tions and sometimes to their advice, but I am sure that
whenever I took an extreme decision I have obeyed only
the firm commandment of will and conscience which
came from within.
I do not believe in the supposed influence of books. I
do not believe in the influence which comes from perus­
ing the books about the lives and characters of men.
For myself, I have used only one big book.
For myself, I have had only one great teacher.
The book is life—lived.
The teacher is day-by-day experience.
The reality of experience is far more eloquent than
all the theories and philosophies on all the tongues and
on all the shelves.
I have never, with closed eyes, accepted the thoughts
of others when they were estimating events and realities
either in the normal course of things or when the situa­

The Book of Life

23

tion appeared exceptional. I have searched, to be sure,
with a spirit of analysis the whole ancient and modern
history of my country. I have drawn parallels because
I wanted to explore to the depths on the basis of his­
torical fact the profound sources of our national life and
of our character, and to compare our capacities with
those of other people.
For my supreme aim I have had the public interest.
If I spoke of life I did not speak of a concept of my
own life, my family life or that of my friends. I spoke
and thought and conceived of the whole Italian life
taken as a synthesis—as an expression of a whole people.
I do not wish to be misunderstood, for I give a defi­
nite value to friendship, but it is more for sentimental
reasons than for any logical necessity either in the realm
of politics or that of reasoning and logic. I, perhaps
more than most men, remember my school friends. I
have followed their various careers. I keep in my mem­
ory all my war friends, and teachers and superiors and
assistants. It makes little difference whether these
friendships were with commanding officers or with typi­
cal workers of our soil.
On my soldier friends the life of trench warfare—
hard and fascinating—has left, as it has upon me, a
profound effect. Great friendships are not perfected on
school benches, nor in political assemblies. Only in front
of the magnitude and the suggestiveness of danger, only
after having lived together in the anxieties and torments
of war, can one weigh the soundness of a friendship
or measure in advance how long it is destined to go on.

24

My Autobiography

In politics, Italian life has had a rather short pano­
rama of men. All know one another. I have not for­
gotten those who in other days were my companions in
the socialistic struggle. Their friendship remains, pro­
vided they on their part acknowledge the need to make
amends for many errors, and provided they have been
able to understand that my political evolution has been
the product of a constant expansion, of a flow from
springs always nearer to the realities of living life and
always further away from the rigid structures of socio­
logical theorists.
My Fascist friends live always in my thoughts. I be­
lieve the younger ones have a special place there. The
organization of Fascism was marked and stamped with
youth. It has youth’s spirit and it gathered youth, which,
like a young orchard, has many years of productiveness
for the future.
Though it appears that the obligations of governing
increase around me every day, I never forget those who
were with me—the generous and wise builders, the un­
selfish and faithful collaborators, the devoted soldiers
of a new Fascist Italy. I follow step by step their per­
sonal and public fortunes.
Some minds appear curious as to what territories my
reading has explored. I have never attached my name
or my mind to a certain school, and as I have already
said, I never believed that books were absolute and sure
viaticums of life.
I have read the Italian authors, old and new—think­
ers, politicians, artists. I have always been attracted by

The Book of Life

25

the study of our Renaissance in all its aspects. The
nineteenth century, with its artistic and spiritual con­
trasts, classicism and romanticism and their contrasts,
has held my attention. I have studied thoroughly the
period of our history called risorgimento in its moral
and political essence.
I have analyzed with great care all the development
of our intellectual life from 1870 up to this moment.
These studies have occupied the most serene hours of
my day.
Among foreign writers, I have meditated much upon
the work of the German thinkers. I have admired the
French. One of the books that interested me most was
the “Psychology of the Crowd” by Gustave Lebon. The
intellectual life of the Anglo-Saxons interests me espe­
cially because of the organized character of its culture
and its scholastic taste and flavor.
But all that I have read and am reading is only a pic­
ture that is unfolded before my eyes without giving me
an impression strong enough to make an incision in me.
I draw out only the cardinal points that give me above
all and first of all the necessary elements for the com­
parison of the essence of the different nations.
I am desperately Italian. I believe in the function of
Latinity.
I came to these conclusions after and through a criti­
cal study of the German, Anglo-Saxon and Slavonic
history and that of the world; nor have I for obvious
reasons neglected the history of the other continents.
The American people, by their sure and active crea­

26

My Autobiography

tive lines of life, have touched, and touch, my sensibility.
For I am a man of government and of party. I end­
lessly admire those who make out of creative work a
law of life, those who win with the ability of their genius
and not with the intrigue of their eloquence. I am for
those who seek to make technic perfect in order to domi­
nate the elements and give to men more sure footings
for the future.
I do not respect—I even hate—those men that leech
a tenth of the riches produced by others.
The American nation is a creative nation, sane, with
straight-lined ideas. When I talk with men of the
United States it does not occur to me to use diplomacy
for winning or persuading them. The American spirit is
crystalline. One has to know how to take it and possibly
win it over with a watchful responsiveness rather than
with cunning words. As the reserves of wealth are gone
now from the continents to North America, it is right
that a large part of the attention of the world should be
concentrated upon the activity of this nation that has
men of great value, economists of real wisdom and
scholars that are outlining the basis of a new science and
a new culture. I admire the discipline of the American
people and their sense of organization. Certainly every
nation has its periods. The United States is now in the
golden age. It is necessary to study these tendencies and
their results, and this is not only in the interest of Amer­
ica hut in the interest of the world.
America, a land harboring so many of our emigrants,
still calls to the spirit of new youth.

The Book of Life

27

I look to her youth for her destinies and the preserva­
tion of her growing ideals, just as I look to the youth of
Italy for the progress of the Fascist state. It is not
easy to remember always the importance of youth. It
is not easy to retain the spirit of youth.
It was fortunate for me that in the trenches of the
Carso—one of the bloodiest and most terrible spots of
all the Allied battle fronts and in the vicissitudes of dif­
ficult experiences in the struggle with life, I did not
leave my own youth behind.

CHAPTER IV

WAR AND ITS EFFECT UPON A MAN

WRITE of war and my experience in and with
war. I write of popular misconceptions as to war.
I write of my convictions as to war. And I write
of war from two points of view—the politics of the
world and the reality of the trenches, where I have been
and have learned the torture of pain.
It is impossible for me to show my development and
feelings from war without showing how my nation en­
tered war, felt war and accepted war. My psychology
was the Italian psychology. I lived it and I cannot sup­
press it.
It was nonsense to believe that war came unheralded
and as a new experience.
The European war, which suddenly burst out in 1914
during a period of apparent economic and moral peace­
fulness, was not a sudden return to barbarism, as many
optimistic socialists and believers in democracy wished
—and still to this day wish—people to believe. One must
not forget that in 1904 and 1905 Russia fought with
Japan a long, disastrous and exhausting war. In 1911
there was the Libyan war. In 1912 and 1913 two Balkan
Wars had kept the awakened attention of Europe on

I

28

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 29
the destinies of these nations. These wars had in them
the characteristics of an extraordinary drama, as in the
incident of Lule-Burgas and in the siege of Adrianople.
The real truth of the matter was that an intense spirit
of war was all over Europe—in the air—and everybody
breathed it. It was the imponderable; we were at the
dawn of a new tragic period of the history of mankind.
The beginning of that hard historic event, the World
War, was at hand. The gigantic development drew in
peoples and continents. It compelled tens of millions of
men to live in the trenches, to fight inch by inch for
years over the bloody theatre of tragic conflict. Millions
of dead and wounded, victories and defeats, complex
interests—moral or immoral—spirit of resentment and
hate, bonds of friendship and disillusionments—all that
chaotic and passionate world which lived and made the
Great War was part of a cyclopic ensemble which is
difficult to grasp, to define, to circumscribe in mere au­
tobiographic memoirs like these.
When one thinks that Germany alone has already
published on the war sixty official books, and considers
many that the other nations have published or will pub­
lish, one may lose himself in the labyrinth of speculative
thoughts. This tremendous chaos gave birth among the
d<■ I'm.ted nations to the dissolving intellectual scepticism
I'mm which sprang the philosophy of realities.
Therefore I proceed by impression, by remembrances.
I l o n e m y memory to build up, in a logical line running
I e o - i 1 1 * 1 t o m y thoughts and actions, the rich picture and
the
mu mble interlocking events which took place

30

My Autobiography

in the most tortured period that humanity ever knew. I
was intimately entwined with it.
The tragedy of Serajevo, the murder of the Arch­
duke Francis Ferdinand, heir to the throne of AustriaHungary, and his wife, created a panic in the public
opinion of the whole of Europe. Remember that I was
then editor of an internationalist-socialist daily. That
which wounded the sensitiveness of the various nations
was the lightning rapidity of the tragedy. I could see
the mathematical efficiency of the organizations which
made possible the plans and success of the murder in
spite of all the exceptional precautions taken by the
police of Austria-IIungary. I realized that Europe was
in sympathy with the restlessness of Serbia against the
old Hapsburg monarchy. After the annexation of
Bosnia-Herzegovina by Austria, that region never had
a minute’s peace. The Serbian mentality, which worked
—and still does—itself along the subterranean tunnels
of secret societies, gave from time to time unpleasant
surprises to Austria-Hungary, and the large empire was
suffering from it. But no more than a thoroughbred is
disturbed by flies.
The tragedy of Serajevo, however, appeared to me
to be the last straw. Every one understood that Austria
would act. Strong measures! All the embassies, all the
different political parties of Europe, realized the grav­
ity of the case and its terrible consequences. They went
feverishly to work to find a possible solution. And we
looked on!
In Italy the echo of the murder of Serajevo aroused

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 31
only curiosity and a thirst for more news. Even when
the corpses of the archduke and his wife were taken into
the Gulf of Triest, which was lighted up the whole
night with tremendous torches, the impression on Ital­
ians, even those still under Austrian rule, was no deeper
than it would have been in the presence of a spectacular
epilogue of a theatrical tragedy.
Francis Ferdinand was an enemy of Italy. I thought
that he always underestimated our race. He was not
able to sense the heart throbs of the people of Italian
blood still under his flag. He could not weigh the power
of race consciousness. He was cherishing the dream of
a monarchy melting three races together. Races, I knew,
are difficult to melt. Francis Ferdinand enjoyed the dis­
play of his antipathy toward Italy. He took interest in
the affairs of Italy only to seek a possible solution for
the question of the temporal power of the Pope. It was
said that in the secrecy of his court and among his re­
ligious advisers he contemplated the creation of a papal
city in Rome with an outlet on the sea.
Though deeply a Catholic, like myself, he accepted
of Christianity only the hard, familiar, autocratic ideals
which were the base of the old despotism forming the
platform of autocratic government, but were incapable
of speaking to souls. In psychological makeup, this
small, snarling archduke believed himself to be specially
anointed by God to rule over subjects. He put fear in
the hearts of smaller nations bordering his domain. His
death gave surprise; it gave no sadness to us. For ob­
vious reasons the pathetic end of the archduchess ere-

32

My Autobiography

ated feelings of a more sympathetic nature. We Italians
are responsive, sympathetic.
The telegram of the Kaiser to the bereaved children
fed the already dramatic tune and tempo of our impres­
sions. I saw that Germany intended steadfastly to stand
back of Austria for whatever action this nation was
going to take toward Serbia. It was thought that Vienna
would make a formal protest to Belgrade, but no one
anticipated an ultimatum of such deadliness as fatally
to wound the sensibility and the honor, as well as the
very freedom, of that nation. All these currents I had
to watch as the young editor of the Avanti.
The dictatorial form of the ultimatum, the style in
which it was written, brought home to the world the
shocking realization that war hung in the sky. We, in
Italy, had to ask whether internationalism was having
a success or whether it was an unreality. I wondered
and reached a conclusion.
Embassies went feverishly to work; the political par­
ties added the pressure of their weight to the diplomatic
activities. The call to arms and the clamor of gathering
armies put into second line the theoretical protests of
socialist and international forces.
All of us in Italy who faced hard facts rather than
mouthy theories heard the call of our country—a call of
loneliness. Illusions burst like bubbles. Even the con­
vention of French and German Socialists and the mur­
der of Jaures in Paris were but secondary episodes. To
me they appeared as fringes of the mighty and dramatic
conflict toward which day by day the various nations
were being drawn by destiny.

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 33
I must not forget that a few months previous to the
Great War I had heard and noted a voice raised in the
French parliament painting with pessimistic colors the
inefficiency of the French Army, both from the view­
point of economic war and the lack of modern means of
defense and offense. Clemenceau, foaming at the mouth,
was present at this discussion. lie said afterward that
never in his career as a politician since 1871 had he wit­
nessed a more dramatic seance than this one in which
the French nation was compelled fully to realize the in­
sufficiency of its army, lacking the very means needed
for a great conflict. That was a lesson. We do not for­
get it.
War was ripe. The tardy and weak intervention, both
known and secret, of the Pope and of the benevolent
nations outside the circle of the Allies had no weight.
They could not stop the procession of events. War
began the first of August, 1914. It was the full bloom
of summer. Under the deep shadow of the cloud the
people of old Europe stood in awe, but fascinated as one
is fascinated by a snake.
Italy a few years previously had renewed the Triple
Alliance Treaty. It had been a marriage without respect
and without trust, brought about more in order to coun­
terbalance military power than by political necessity.
There is small difference between security and military
alliance.
The alliance with Austria and Germany gave, how­
ever, to Italy a certain latitude and a certain freedom of
movement. The Marchese of San Giuliano, who was at

34

My Autobiography

the head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, faced by
the Austrian ultimatum to Serbia and by the scheming
to bring about war at all costs, had to play fast to keep
Italy neutral. As a matter of fact, the treaty called only
for action if one or more of the nations of the Triple
Alliance was assaulted i>y a nation outside that alliance.
We were kept in the dark, as J well knew. That was
enough to break the pact—to free us from further obli­
gations to that alliance.
One of the first courageous actions in which Italy
showed the measure of her independence and strength
was recognition of this. Meanwhile the intervention of
Russia in behalf of Serbia called also France against
Germany, the ally of Austria-Hungary.
I watched England. She was pondering deeply upon
the step to take; and then, in order to keep her suprem­
acy, and also for the sake of her pride and the sake of
humanity, she moved her formidable war machinery and
quickened the organization of new armies to snatch from
Germany’s grip the control of the old Continent.
Public opinion in Italy was deeply moved, facing
war, with its German invasion of East France. There
was the description, with horrid details, of German
methods, and above all the invasion of Belgium in spite
of every sense of right and humanity. The French Army
was helplessly forced back. The future, not of one na­
tion but of many nations, was in the scale. Of this, in
my editorial office, I was always conscious. There was
also the feeling of a common culture which was com­
pelling us to forget past and present quarrels. I could

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 35
not bear the idea that my country might abandon those
who were crushed under the weight of war and unwar­
ranted misfortune.
Germany began to influence Italian public opinion
with methods of propaganda that irritated the sensitive­
ness of our race. That enraged me. To direct this propa­
ganda, a great diplomat, Prince von Biilow, who knew
the Italian and Roman world intimately, was sent. His
aim in Italy was to ensure its neutrality for good and all.
But our nation was turning toward war. I was help­
ing. The Socialist party, which at that time had a cer­
tain weight in Italian life, due more to weakness of
other political parties than to its own strength, was un­
certain what attitude to take. There it wabbled. The
majority in that party stood for an absolute neutrality
—a neutrality without limit of time, pledge or dignity.
In that party there were many who stood openly in
sympathy with Germany. I did not. A handful of intel­
ligent and strong-willed men began to ask themselves
if it was really right for Italians to lend themselves to
the political aims of the King of Prussia, and if that
was good for the future of Italy and of the world. I,
myself, asked that question in the newspaper Avanti.
For obvious reasons it was read avidly by every class of
citizens. The putting of that question was my most disI inguished effort at journalism.
11 was sufficient to cause a part of public opinion to
turn toward the possibility of our standing side by side
with France and England in the war. We could not, and
should not, forget that there were certain sentimental

36

My Autobiography

reasons, besides the practical reasons, advising us to
review in this general conflict the old decision concern­
ing our eastern border, which had remained open since
our war with Austria in 1886.
At night I walked to my family, to my home, with
pregnant questions in my mind, with deepening de­
termination, with hardening resolution. Above all, there
was my own country. I saw that internationalism was
crumbling. The unit of loyalty was too large. I wrote
an editorial in which I said also how utterly foolish
was the idea that even if a socialist state were created,
the old harriers of race and historical contentions would
not go on causing wars.
Italy’s borders on the eastern side reached the Judrio,
but the region of Trentino illegally held by Austria en­
tered as a wedge between Lombardy and the Venetian
provinces. Our deal with the empire of Austria-Hun­
gary was still to he closed, because the borders prophe­
sied by Dante were dear to every Italian heart. They
were still and always would be along the line of the
Brenner and of the Giulian and Illyrian Alps, includ­
ing Fiume and Dalmatia.
Facing this new situation, every political man, includ­
ing myself, began to examine his conscience. The mere
mention of this problem was sufficient to make clear and
evident the hidden travail of national consciousness. I
was transformed in my thought.
“Now or never!” was the war cry of Cesare Battisti,
whose noble spirit and final martyrdom by Austrian
execution has made him immortal in Italian hearts.

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 37
Then there was the prophetic vision of that fiery revolu­
tionary spirit, Filippo Corridoni. With their inspiration
I began to drag with me a fraction of the Socialists in
favor of war. I had with me rebels of many schools, who
through the dregs of their struggles would in the end
now stand once more upon the indestructible vitality of
our race.
The Socialist Senedrium, seeing where I was going,
took the Avanti out of my control. I could no longer
preach, by that means, intervention of Italy in the war.
I faced the Socialists in our conventions. I was ex­
pelled. I held public gatherings.
I created the Fasciti—a group of daring youths who
believed that intervention could be forced. Do not doubt
that their actions shook deeply our political framework,
existing from the time of the independence of Italy up
till 1914. I was their leader.
It is interesting to-day when democracy is challenged
to recall that the Liberal Democratic pacifist group,
headed by Giovanni Giolitti, a man of great influence
in parliament and also a shrewd organizer of political
schemes, was busy in the attempt to find a formula
which would solve the problem of righting the borders
of Italy, but which would save our country from the
burden, the sacrifice and the loss of life that every war
imposes. Giolitti promised that, even without war, Italy
could obtain a great deal. This “great deal” awakened
a feeling of sarcasm in the generous hearts of Italians.
Naturally they are realists and the enemies of all forms
of political bargaining.
Italians were looking beyond those peaceful conces­

38

My Autobiography

sions and those petty betterings of the borders. They did
not believe in the sincerity of this scheming. I consid­
ered it weak statesmanship—the statesmanship of com­
promise. There were seers who saw in the European
conflict not only national advantages but the possibility
of a supremacy of race. In the cycle of time, again a
dramatic period had come which was making it possible
for Italy by the weight of its army to deal as an equal
with the leading nations of the world.
That was our chance. 1 wanted to seize it. It became
my one thought of intensity.
The World War began on July 28, 1914. Within
sixty days I severed my official connection with the So­
cialist party. I had already ceased to be editor of the
Avanti.
I felt lighter, fresher. I was free! I was better pre­
pared to fight my battles than when I was bound by the
dogmas of any political organization. But I understood
that I could not use with efficient strength my convic­
tions if I was without that modern weapon, capable of
all possibilities, ready to arm and to help, good for of­
fense and defense—the newspaper.
I needed a daily paper. I hungered for one. I gath­
ered together a few of my political friends who had fol­
lowed me in the last hard struggle and we held a war
council. When money alone is concerned, I am anything
but a wizard. When it is a question of means or of cap­
ital to start a project, or how to finance a newspaper, I
grasp only the abstract side, the political value, the spir­
itual essence of the thing. To me, money is detestable;

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 39
what it may do is sometimes beautiful and sometimes
noble.
A few friends, bristling with ideas and ardent with
faith, almost immediately found small rooms, garret­
like, in the narrow street of Paolo da Cannobio, near the
Piazza del Duomo in Milan. Near by there was a print­
ing establishment. Its owner agreed to publish our
newspaper at a small cost. I was mad to tell Italy and
Italians the truth—their opportunity!
We had no need for great means. We wanted a news­
paper that would hold the city of Milan like a fortress,
with editorial articles of such value that they would be
reprinted or quoted by every Italian newspaper.
Thus—and how dramatically!—the number of our
readers would be multiplied. That was my passion. Our
offices were quickly furnished with a desk and a few
chairs. I can never cease to have affection for that intel­
lectual dugout, the journalistic trenches from which I
began to fight. A contract was signed with the printing
establishment—a contract that every week was in dan­
ger of smashing for the lack of the few thousand lire
needed to pay our weekly expense. But we were living
on an idea.
On November 15, 1914, the first number of the Popolo d’Italia appeared. Even now I call this new paper
my most cherished child. It was only through it, small
as was its beginning, that I was able to win all the bat­
tles of my political life. I am still its director.
I could write and I may write a thousand memories
of LIiis newspaper which was born in 1914 and remained

40

My Autobiography

my platform up to 1922. It was an instrument for the
making of me. The name of the Popolo d’ltalia will
occur over and over again. Its story in any case may be
told through my personality as a political man, as a
newspaper man, as a believer in this war, as a soldier,
as an Italian and as a Fascist.
My first article in the Popolo d’ltalia turned a large
part of public opinion toward the intervention of Italy
in the war, side by side with France and England.
Standing by me and helping my work as newspaper
man were the Fascisti. They were composed of revolu­
tionary spirits who believed in intervention. They were
youths—the students of the universities, the socialist
syndicalists—destroying faith in Karl Marx by their
ideals. There were professional men too—and the work­
ingmen who could still hear the real voice of the country.
And now, while Italy remained out of the war, our
first legions of volunteers were organized and went to
France to fight. In the Argonne fell the two sons of
Ricciotti Garibaldi, Bruno and Costante, nephews of
the great Garibaldi, who conquered North Sicily and
Naples for United Italy. The funeral of the two heroes
took place in Rome and had solemn echoes all over
Italy. Again the red shirts, once distinguished as the
saviors of Italy, now in the land of France, testified to
the indestructibility of Latinity.
The past quarrels—not long past—of Mediterranean
interests were wiped out. The hostilities of the French
during the time of our war in Libya were put aside. No
one remembered the episode of the French ships Ma-

The first offices, in Milan, of the Popolo d’ltalia, Mussolini’s paper.

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 41
nouba and Carthage, which brought help to the Turks,
who were fighting against us, in January, 1912. Every­
thing was off. France was in danger, assaulted and in­
vaded after the tragic rape of Belgium. This I preached
and set forth. France was in danger!
Gabriele d’Annunzio, on the fifth of May, made his
speech at Quarto dei Mille, near Genoa. Quarto dei
Mille was the starting point of Garibaldi and his thou­
sand northerners and other patriots who went down to
Sicily to deliver Southern Italy from the yoke of the
Bourbons. He, with superb eloquence, exhorted Italy
to enter the war.
The spirit of the country was tuned up. The opposi­
tion of Giolitti brought about a quick decision. The
crown, bound by parliamentary formulas and by the ad­
vice of its counsellors, wanting to follow strictly the lit­
eral and orthodox interpretation of the constitution, told
the personal representative of the Kaiser that Italy as
an old ally had been kept in the dark and thus betrayed.
The insurrection in Milan in favor of war, the strong
feelings of the same flavor in Rome, Padua, Genoa and
Naples, decided ITis Majesty Victor Emmanuel III to
exclude Giovanni Giolitti and to reconfide to Salandra,
who had tendered his resignation, the task of reconsti­
tuting a new ministry. I felt that I had had a part in
winning this battle. Still a young unproved man, I had
already a record of untrammeled freedom and power.
The new ministry spelled war. Thrown aside was the
“great deal” of His Excellency Giolitti; the question
now was to choose the right moment and the right way

42

My Autobiography

to jump into the war. We were breathing hard, our
hearts were ready, we were awaiting the great hour. It
came May 24, 1915. Can any one say what were my
emotions at this moment of triumph?
I cannot try to narrate in one chapter all the events
of the war on the Italian front. It is impossible. The
war moulded me. I was forced into its dramatic unfold­
ing in the circumscribed view-point of a mere soldier of
the war. I will tell what touched me most as a soldier
and indirectly as a political man.
I made up my mind to be the best soldier possible
from the very day that I wore again the glorious uni­
form of gray-green of the regiment of Bersaglieri—the
best shock troops of Italy—in which regiment I had
already served during the time of my compulsory mili­
tary service. I wanted to be a soldier, obedient, faithful
to discipline, stretching myself with all my might to
the fulfilment of my duty.
In this I felt that I succeeded. My political position
brought me plenty of offers of privileges and sheltered
places. I turned them down.
I wanted to create the impression of a complete and
rigid consistence with an ideal. This was not a scheming
on my part for personal gain; it was a deep need in my
nature of what I believed and still hold on to as my life’s
dedication—namely, that once a man sets up to be the
expounder of an idea or of a new school of thought, he
must consistently and intensively live the daily life and
fight battles for the doctrines that he teaches at any cost
until victory—to the end!

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 43
Time has effaced many things; the easy spirit of for­
getfulness has erased so much. Victory, which came
after forty-one months of hard fighting, has awakened
many deep resentments.
As soon as war was declared, as I have said, I asked
the military authorities to accept my services as a volun­
teer. They answered that I could not be a volunteer.
That was a tragedy. They said that they refused on the
ground that an article of the military by-laws consid­
ered as possible volunteers only those who had been re­
jected for physical unfitness, or were exonerated for
other reasons from compulsory military service. I could
not be accepted as a volunteer. I was to wait my turn to
be called to arms until the order from my superiors
should be sent me. I was disconsolate.
Happily, my turn came quickly. On September first,
only three months after Italy declared war, I donned
the simple uniform of a private Bersagliere. I was sent
to Brescia, in Lombardy, not far from the raids of air­
planes, to drill.
Almost at once I was, to my great relief, despatched
to the thick of the fighting on the high Alps. For a few
months I underwent the hardest trials of my life in
mountain trenches. We still had nothing to soften our
hardships in the trenches or in the barracks. We were
.imply stumbling along. Short of everything—carrying
on
muddling through! What we suffered the first
monIhs -cold, rain, mud, hunger! They did not succeed
m < l . i m pci ling in the slightest degree my enthusiasm and
m y conviction as to the necessity and the inevitableness

44

My Autobiography

of war. They did not change the direction of one hair of
my head, one thought in it.
I was chosen to be the amanuensis of headquarters.
That I refused. I refused flatly. I amused myself in­
stead by joining the most dangerous reconnoitering ex­
peditions. It was my will and my wish. I gained through
that. Within a few months I was promoted corporal by
merit of war action, with a citation from my superior in
these words: “Benito Mussolini, ever the first in opera­
tions of courage and audacity.”
My political past, with the suspicions of cautious and
sometimes unseeing authorities, still followed me; it was
enough to keep my superiors from sending me to the
training school for officers at Vernezzo. After one week
of leave I went back to the trenches, where I remained
for months. The same life, feverish, adventurous, des­
perate—and then typhoid fever sent me to the military
hospital at Cividale. When I was better I was packed
off to Ferrara for a brief, stupid period of convales­
cence. From there I again took my place on the high
pinnacles of the Alps where at night one looking into
the dark sky with its shimmering stars felt nearer to
the great dome above.
My battalion was ordered to an advance post on the
Carso—Section 144—to take up the offensive. I was
then made one of the company of soldiers who had spe­
cialized in hand grenades. We lived only a few dozen
yards from the enemy, in a perpetual and, it sometimes
seemed, an eternal atmosphere of shell fire and mortal
danger that would be our life forever.

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 45
After the first period of hardship I became perfectly
and almost comfortably accustomed to all the terrible
elements that life in the trenches involves. I read with
hungry eagerness the Popolo d’ltalia—my newspaper.
I had left it in the hands of a few friends. Precipitously
separated from it, as one leaves suddenly a beloved rela­
tive, I had given orders to keep alight the lamp of
Italy’s duty and destiny.
I commanded: “Continue always to call for war to
the end.”
I wrote often to my friends. Never did I let myself
indulge in writing all my true feelings and opinions,
because I was first of all a soldier, obeying. I found my
recreation in the trenches studying the psychology of
officers and troops. Later on that practice in observation
became invaluable to me.
In my rough heart I held a persistent admiration for
the soldiers from all corners of Italy. Many ordered to
the eastern front were not convinced of the historical
basis for the war; yet they knew how to obey their com­
manding officers with admirable discipline. Many of
those officers were students of the colleges and universi­
ties. It was fine to see them striving to emulate the regu­
lars and to prove that the old-time valor was still alive
in the new Italian generation.
The fact was that war, with its heavy toll of man and
materials, and with its terrific hardships, surprised us.
It was far away from our Garibaldian conception of
what war was. We were compelled, in breakneck haste,
to modify our ideas, to change our systems of fighting

46

My Autobiography

and our methods of offense and defense. My heart was
gladdened to see that the capacity for adaptability of
our race brought marvellous and quick returns. The
headquarters and all the auxiliary military organiza­
tions, particularly the medical, worked with a precision
which I never have forgotten. But often, as I went over
the political situation back of our armies, dark doubts
were in my mind. The work and actions of the men in
power and of the political organizations centred in
Rome caused me deep fears. The parliamentary world
seemed unable to free itself from its old faults.
The poisonous currents of non-intervention and neu­
trality were still spending their last strength upon us.
They would not fairly face their defeat. I knew they
were doing their utmost to minimize the energy and
elasticity of our fighting efforts.
The foolish babblings and fears of the coffeehouse
strategists, the slackers whose presence offended the
families whose sons were in the war, contributed to de­
press the spirit of resistance. As a plain soldier, I could
not understand how, for instance, Rumania could be
dragged into the war with a few hundred machine guns.
How could Greece be persuaded to march against the
Turks, influenced by a classic dance that Isadora Dun­
can performed at the Piraeus ?
I was following, day by day, the movement of our
army—the Battle of the Isonzo in 1916, the fights on
the Alps. With less interest, I followed the fortunes of
war in France, the unfortunate failure at the Darda­
nelles and the developments in the eastern section. As

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 47
for Italy, never for a minute did I doubt that victory
would finally come to us. Though war were to last
longer than the longest estimate, though our economic
power might totter under the effort and weight of the
conflict, nevertheless I was sure of a final victory.
The Italian army in its various actions was led by a
method of successive assaults, to shake the efficiency of
the enemy. In spite of all the hardship, discipline re­
mained intact throughout our lines. The invasion at­
tempted on the plateaus of the Alps in 1916 was soon
thrown back. The soldiers of the Carso, where I was,
had all the appearance of seasoned veterans.
In such a gigantic drama, when thousands of our
brothers fell, it is absurd to speak of oneself.
However, to prove once more what miseries were
woven into the Italian life of politics, I was compelled
from time to time to give out in the newspapers news
concerning myself. This was in order to smash the sus­
picions of those persons who thought me hidden in some
office, distributing mail and entertaining in my mind
doubts of the possibility of our winning the war. I was
compelled to offset this slander and to state over and
over what I had done and what I was doing. I was then
major corporal of the Bersaglieri and had been in the
front line trenches from the beginning of the war up to
February, 1917, always under arms, always facing the
enemy without my faith being shaken or my convictions
wavering an inch. From time to time I sent articles to
the I'npolo d’ltalia exhorting to endless resistance. I
pleaded for unshaken faith in final victory. For reasons

48

My Autobiography

of military discipline I used a nom de plume. Thus I
found myself fighting in two ways—against the enemy
without and in front of me and against the enemy of
weak spirit within and behind me.
On the morning of February 22,1917, during a bom­
bardment of the enemy trenches in Sector 144—the sec­
tor of the hard-pressed Carso under the heaviest shell­
fire—there happened one of those incidents which was
a daily occurrence in trench life. One of our own gren­
ades burst in our trench among about twenty of us sol­
diers. We were covered with dirt and smoke, and torn by
metal. Four died. Various others were fatally wounded.
I was rushed to the hospital of Ronchi, a few miles
from the enemy trenches. Doctor Piccagnoni and other
surgeons took care of me with the greatest zeal. My
wounds were serious. The patience and ability of the
physicians succeeded in taking out of my body fortyfour pieces of the grenade. Flesh was torn, bones
broken. I faced atrocious pain; my suffering was inde­
scribable. I underwent practically all my operations
without the aid of an anaesthetic. I had twenty-seven
operations in one month; all except two were without
anaesthetics.
This infernal life of pain lasted until a furious bom­
bardment burst into pieces one wing and part of the
central building of my hospital at Ronchi. All the
wounded were rushed to a far-away refuge, but my con­
dition would not permit my removal. Unable to move, I
remained for days under the intermittent fire of the
enemy guns among the dirty, jagged ruins of the build­
ing. I was absolutely defenseless.

HI

d*X'.

%,■

,

:r^

(sfrs’fcui,«,

vM«

From a photograph by A. Baiodi, Milan.

A photograph of Mussolini in the war, published in the Popolo d'Italia
Translation: The most recent snapshot of our editor and his captain taken at a
point of the extreme lines on the Carso.

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 49
In spite of all, my wounds began to heal. Better days
and relief came. I received numberless telegrams of so­
licitude and once His Majesty the King called; his
warm sense of humanity toward all soldiers and toward
the victims of the war will never be forgotten by me or
by Italy.
A fter some months I found myself in a war hospital
in Milan. In August I began to walk with crutches, on
which I swung about for many months. My limbs were
too weak to support my weight.
I took my place as a fighter in my newspaper office.
The acute situation created by the incredible and incon­
ceivable failure of the Russian front was putting upon
us new duties. It was necessary to face them. To all this
there was added a subtle propaganda in the land. That
despicable poison had as a slogan the vile sentence of a
Socialist member of parliament: “We will desert the
trenches before the winter comes.”
There was need to fight to a finish these mysterious
forces which were playing upon the sentiments and suf­
ferings of the people. Soldiers, after a fortnight’s fur­
l o u g h , were returning to the trenches in a sullen frame
of mind. Life in the cities had all the characteristics of
revelry. It was the psychological moment in which it
was necessary to have the people feel highly the strength
of authority. It was necessary that the government
should stand up in its shoes.
I do n o t choose to make posthumous recriminations.
The weakness of internal politics in 1917, the feeble par­
liamentary situation, the hateful socialistic propaganda,
were certainly preparing the ground for events that

50

My Autobiography

could prove to be ruinous. And the blow came in Octo­
ber, 1917; it took the name of Caporetto.
Never in my life as an Italian and as a politician have
I experienced a sorrow equal to that which I suffered
after news of the defeat of Caporetto.
This episode, compared with other defeats in the va­
rious theatres of the Great War, certainly did not have
an exceptional importance, but it was a terrific blow for
Italians. This sudden breaking down of our front let a
wedge of the enemy army penetrate into the high valley
of the Isonzo. 1 n the first rush of the war we had gone
over the borders into old Austria, carrying on our war­
fare on enemy ground. We had withstood in 1916 the
attack on the Alps of Asiago. We had conquered the
plateau of Bains izza. We had been ten times victorious
on the Isonzo. Our sensitiveness and tormented souls
were now shaken to the depths.
The moment was fearful. The Third Army, sur­
rounded on the other side of the Isonzo, must be saved.
It was imperative to stand at all costs on the Piave and
to resist like stone on Mount Grappa to save the north
of the Venetian provinces from being cut off from the
rest of Italy. The rally of the army, followed by quick
action, took place in almost no time. On Mount Grappa
the Army of Iron withstood. On the Piave the enemy
could not pass by. A new strength entered into play.
One could feel it coming. A new spirit of war took its
unfaltering stand. Once more we saw the enemy face to
face, after losing Gorizia and two provinces, Belluno
and Udine. We were deeply wounded, and we lived dra­
matic moments which seared my heart. But we may now

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 51
be sure that Italy did not go through the tragic hours
that many armies and other countries underwent. Com­
pare with our disaster the general picture of the Great
War—the loss of three provinces with the Battle of the
Masurian Lakes, the invasion of Ivonigsberg, the four­
teen invaded departments of France and the flooding
of Belgium.
I am proud that during that year of desperate mo­
ments my paper gave a higher note to the political life
of the country. We raised the fighting spirit of the sol­
diers.
Helped by the mutilated, the wounded and the pro­
war veterans, I began an active campaign of “Stand to
a Finish.” With fiery style I demanded on the part of
the central government severe action against slackers
and whosoever undermined the spirit of war. I called for
the organization of a volunteer army. I asked for mili­
tary rule in the north of Italy. I insisted on the suppres­
sion of socialist newspapers. I asked for a more humane
treatment of the soldiers. I campaigned for war disci­
pline—first behind us and all over the land, then at the
front. This campaign developed by degrees in the news*
paper, then in public meetings, in gatherings at the
front. It brought results far beyond my highest hopes.
The government seemed to be tugged after us by our
efforts, toward resistance and victory.
Thus the winter went by. With the coming of the
s p r i n g the whole Italian people stretched out their ener­
gies Inward the front on the Piave and that on the
(i rap pa.
AI last I A spirit of national solidarity, deep and

52

My Autobiography

alive, had become the common property both of the sol­
diers and of their families. A high spirit of duty and
sacrifice was the rule of life in our Italy!
We were ready in 1918 on the Piave with a heroic
army. The Arditi, the first shock troops, composed of
volunteers who went over the top with hand grenades
and daggers, was giving a unique dramatic appeal to
our aggressive spirit. In every one there was the deep
desire to efface the memory of the days of Caporetto.
We were to go hack—back to where our brothers, dead
and alive, were waiting for us! The remembrance of
our dead, above all, was calling to us. Surely the wish
of our adversaries to cross the Piave could never be; it
was an idle hope, to be met and crushed by our own of­
fensive.
Aviation continued to give service of reconnoitering
and bombardment. I could feel the soul of Italy stretch­
ing toward victory. Necessity had sharpened the more
brilliant minds. June came and with it the dawn of the
enemy’s attack.
Our secret service succeeded in learning exactly the
time that the enemy would start his drive. Following
sound war strategy, our supreme command decided to
surprise the enemy, and just a few hours before the
enemy was ready to move a deluge of every description
fell on his front lines as well as the supporting lines be­
hind. His plans were smashed. He threw bridges across
the Piave, but every one was destroyed. The Montello, which was once the key of that front and which the
enemy intended to take and use as a pincher against our

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 53
army, we held with dogged tenacity. There were oscilla­
tions for a few miles, but the battle raged on without a
stop. Our counter attacks came back always, again and
again and again. Thus after the first three days the
enemy felt that this time the Italians were like an un­
breakable wall which they could not scale or batter
down!
Near Zenzon the adversary succeeded in crossing the
river as far as Monastie of Treviso, but a rapid counter
attack of a few of our brigades threw him back on the
Piave again. It turned into a disaster for the enemy, as
the river, flooded, washed away bridges and soldiers to­
ward the sea. On the twenty-third of June, five days
after the beginning of the big battle, our supreme com­
mand assured Italy that our resistance was bound to
hold. I felt that it was a sure sign that victory was at
hand. I believe to this day that the Battle of the Piave
was one of the most decisive of the whole World War.
The enemy suffered loss beyond reckoning. About
100,000 Hungarians were sacrificed on the Piave. That
brought about deep resentment in Budapest. Among the
people of the various races in the Austrian Empire there
began discussions about the burdens that each nation­
ality in that empire had to suffer. From them—the
enemies—each nationality felt that its treatment was
becoming intolerable.
News leaked out to us from Austria-Hungary. It
was clear that internal difficulties there were growing
every moment. The enemy’s army, however, was still
holding together and under the goad of necessity was

54

My Autobiography

sharpening the work of oppression on our two prov­
inces which still remained under the weight of occupa­
tion and misfortune.
It was at this time, right after the spirit of exhilara­
tion of victory, that I observed strange tendencies in the
Italian political world. Evil activity was at hand. It
needed to be exposed and suppressed. It was cloaked
under the appearance of lnimanitarianism. It was plan­
ning to give a series of national rights to peoples who
never had the consciousness and the dignity of nations
—to peoples who had been for more than a century in­
struments of oppressing the Italian elements under
Austria, under the instigation of the despotic empire.
The sun of our victory was rising, but to be a complete
victory, a victory that would carry our soldiers on the
road to Vienna, it must not falter through false senti­
mentality.
This crisis was sufficient to inspire many great men
still under the influence of antiquated and rusted demo­
cratic ideas to start discussions about the problems of
racial differences. They always tended to favor our
worst enemies. The spirit of our nationalism was at­
tacked and dwarfed by sophisticated and pernicious ap­
plications of sentiment, irritating to our deepest feel­
ings and to our most legitimate susceptibilities. Voices
of the Italians began to say that every time Italy was
on the verge of living its hour of joy, glory and victory
there were always those who soiled the moment, and
this often not in good faith.
Summer went by, and in October, 1918, our supreme

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 55
command, with fifty-one Italian divisions—to which
were added three British, two French divisions, one
American regiment and a few Czecho-Slovakian volun­
teers—determined to make a decisive and final drive on
the Austrian front.
The strategic plan was a very wise one. The enemy’s
front was pierced at Sernaglia; our army rushed
through the break. We started a surrounding move­
ment, one to the left toward Trento, and one to the
right toward Udine and the lower Piave. The ardent
dash of our soldiers and the ability of our officers
brought these movements to full success and crumbled
to pieces the whole front of the enemy. The War Bul­
letin states the enormous number of prisoners, guns and
war material that fell into our hands.
The army of Austria-Hungary was defeated. Its
navy had suffered tremendous losses. We landed at
Triest. We occupied Trento.
The final victory was not only a victory of a war. I
saw more than that. It was a victory for the whole Ital­
ian race. After a thousand years we, awakened, were
again giving a tangible proof of our moral and spiritual
valor. We were living again on warlike tradition. Our
love of country had bloomed again. We felt our for­
midable weight in the future of a new Europe. New
generations of Italians rejoiced, for the Italian cities
were once again rejoined to the country. Trento and
Triest, as our race had wished so long, now were within
the borders—the natural borders which Dante had
prophesied and defined in the fourteenth century.

56

My Autobiography

In every corner of the land the church-bells rang, sa­
luting the new day. War, so long and so taxing, had
ended!
It ended with a full undeniable victory of Italy in
spite of the bankruptcy of Russia and of the abominable
work of slackers and professional destroyers of ideals.
For me, every family wore the badge of a dear one dead
or wounded. Widows and orphans of war were proud to
show the symbols of sadness and glory. We were in
Trento and Triest. Fiume was half conquered, while
Dalmatia was still in the scale.
Over Italy reigned almost supreme a spirit of pride
and of serenity typical of those who have won. War
had lasted longer than we thought, had diminished our
wealth, had supposedly reduced to the minimum our
future.
Victory, however, warmed our hearts and our souls.
It exalted Italians and spurred them to higher work,
honoring the dead as well as the living. From October
to December, 1918, Italy seemed like a factory work­
ing in full blast in complete accord with progress. War
had left, beyond its inevitable griefs, a deep poetical
vein in our national life. No one sensed it better, no one
seemed more a part of it, than I.
It was in this great historical moment immediately
after a victory achieved with untold hardship that our
young nation—younger as a nation than America—with
traditions not yet seasoned by age, in spite of having
thrown into the glowing brazier of the conflict men and
wealth, was treacherously deceived. Its fundamental

War and Its Effect Upon a Man 57
trustfulness was played upon in the making of the
Treaty of Versailles.
This is the awful toll that Italy paid in the Great
War—652,000 dead, 450,000 mutilated, 1,000,000
wounded. There is not in our country one single family
which during the forty-one months of the war had not
placed in the holocaust, on the altar of the country, a
part of itself. I know every day, ten years later, that
I he mutilated, the wounded, the widows and orphans of
war form a vast proportion of our population, inspiring
I he respect and homage of the multitude.
I never forget. We have gone through a thousand
phases of internal troubles, from aberrations to a puri­
fying revolution, yet—from Mount Stelvio to the sea, in
our mountain cemeteries which the hand of time slowly
effaces—there remains the most powerful citadel of the
fortune of our nation and of our people. I never forget.
I had been the most tenacious believer in the war. I
had fought with all my warm soul of Italian and soldier.
I lived the joy of victory. I lived in the midst of the
unrest of after-war. But in every event, happy or sad,
I have always had as a touchstone, as a lighthouse, as a
source of every advice and of deep wisdom, the memory
of Ihe dead. They are from every region and from every
walk of life, even those who were under foreign yoke or
emigrated to other countries. They gave their blood and
w e r e willing to offer the supreme sacrifice for the
I her country. Until the time when a nation has the
riglil of sitting with proud head among other nations,
Ihe .surest sign of its strength, the highest title of its

58

My Autobiography

nobility, the vital food needed to reach greatness, will
always be given by those who laid down their blood and
life for their immortal country.
These are the marks that war made upon one’s body,
one’s mind and one’s soul.
Above all, it gave to one, who was still young, an un­
derstanding of the essences of mankind.

CHAPTEB V

ASHES AND EMBERS

HE flame of war flickered and went out. But the
years 1919 and 1920 that immediately followed
the end of the war seemed to me the darkest and
most painful periods of Italian life. Dark thunderclouds
hung above our unity. The progress of Italy’s unifica­
tion was threatened. I watched the gathering storm.
Already disquieting events had menaced our national
life. They were due to political happenings, even more
than to an economic crisis. I point to the movement of
the Sicilian Gasei in 1894 and the bloody demonstration
in Milan in 1898. But these manifestations of rebellion
were localized. Not one of them bore in it the virile
germs of dissolution or of separatism. But I assert that
I lie episodes of 1919 and 1920 had in them bacilli which
i f not treated heroically are deadly for the life of a civilized nation.
Everything was discussed again. We Italians opened
I lie liox of political problems and took apart the social
clockwork. We pawed over everything from the crown
lo parliament, from the army to our colonies, from capilali .Iie property to the communistic soviet proposal for
I lie federation of the regions of Italy, from schools to

T

59

60

My Autobiography

the papacy. The lovely structure of concord and har­
mony that we combatants and the wounded had dreamed
that we would build after the luminous victory of Oc­
tober, 1918, was falling to pieces. The leaves were fall­
ing from our tree of idealism.
I felt that we were left without any cohesive force,
any suggestive heroism, any remembrance, any political
philosophy, sufficient to overcome and stop the factors
of dissolution. I sensed the chills and heats of decay and
destruction.
Already in January, 1919, the Socialists, slightly
checked during the war, began, the moment the ink was
drying on the armistice, their work of rebellion and
blackmail. From Milan the socialistic municipality sent
a special mission of help to the so-called brothers in
Vienna. Sickly internationalism put forth its buds in
this morbid springtime. At Triest the socialist Pittoni
played an important part in the reorganization of the
delivered city. In many Italian cities poor children of
the old enemy Austrian and Hapsburg capital were
asked to take precedence. It was a provoking sentimen­
tality. A desire was already clear in the minds of sub­
versives and of Liberal-Giolittians; it was to strike
out of our memories the sense and feeling of our victory.
I knew those who whipped up our degeneration. They
were German and Austrian spies, Russian agitators,
mysterious subventions. In a few months they had led
the Italian people into a state of marasmus. The eco­
nomic crisis existing in every corner of the world could
not be expected to spare Italy. The soldiers, like my­

Ashes and Embers

61

self, returning from the war, rushed to their families.
Who can describe our feelings? Such an imposing phe­
nomenon as the demobilization of millions of men took
place in the dark, without noise, in an atmosphere of
throwing discipline to the winds. There were, for us, the
troubles of winter and the difficulties of finding new
garments and adjustments for peace.
We suffered the humiliation of seeing the banners of
our glorious regiments returned to their homes without
being saluted, without that warm cheer of sympathy
owed to those who return from victorious war. Now
it again appeared to me and to my friends as if there
was in everybody an instinct to finish the game of the
war, not with the idea of real victory but with content
that we had lost as little as possible. Ears and spirits
were ready to listen to words of peace, of humanity, of
brotherhood between the nations. At night before sleep
came I used to meditate and realize that we had no
dam to stop this general decay of faith, this renuncia­
tion of the interests and destiny of a victorious nation.
The sense of destruction penetrated very quickly and
deeply the spirit of all classes. Certainly the central gov­
ernment was no dike to prevent the flood of weakness.
Politicians and philosophers, profiteers and losers—
l o r ;i I least many had lost their illusions—sharks trying
lo \.ivc themselves; promoters of the war trying to be
pH id demagogues seeking popularity; spies and
in I im.illors of trouble waiting for the price of their treaoii, n pen Is paid by foreign money in a few months
H i m w i I k nation into an awful spiritual crisis. I saw be­

62

My Autobiography

fore me with awe the gathering dusk of our end as a
nation and a people.
With my heart in tumult and with a deep sense of
bitterness corroding my soul, I could smell the danger.
Some audacious men were with me—not many. My ac­
tion was at first tied to the urgent duty to fight against
one important and dark treason. Certain Italians,
blinded and having lost their memories, were led on by
some complicity and selfish desires among the Allies.
These Italians were actually setting themselves against
the mother country. Dalmatia, Italian in its origin, ar­
dent as a saint in its faith, had been recognized to be ours
by the pact of London; Dalmatia had waited for the
victorious war with years of passion, and holding in its
bosom still the remains of Venice and of Rome, was now
lopped off from our unity. The politics of renunciation,
helped by foreigners, galloped forward. Wilson was the
distiller or supporter of theoretical formulas. He could
not comprehend Italian life or history. By his uncon­
scious aid this treason to us was nourished. Fiume, the
sacrificed town, whose people called desperately for
Italy in its manifestations in the public squares, who
sent pleading missions to our military chiefs, was occu­
pied by corps of international troops. We were about to
lose another war trophy—the Austrian navy. Sesana,
twenty kilometers from Triest, was discussed as a pos­
sible frontier!
I said then that never in the life of any nation on the
day after victory had there been a more odious tragedy
than that of this silly renunciation. In the first months

Ashes and Embers

63

of 1919, Italy, led on by politicians like Nitti and Albertini Salvemini, had only one frantic wish that I could
see—it was to destroy every gain of victorious struggle.
Its only dedication was to a denial of the borders and
soil extent of the nation. It forgot our 600,000 dead and
our 1,000,000 wounded. It made waste of their generous
blood. These leaders wanted to satisfy foreign impulses
of doubtful origin and doctrines brewed of poisons. This
attempt at matricide of the motherland was abetted by
Italians of perverted intellect and by professional so­
cialists. Toward both, later on, the Fascist revolution
showed so much forbearance that it was more than gen­
erosity.
I was snatched up in this fight against the returning
beast of decadence. I was for our sacred rights to our
own territories. Therefore I had to neglect in a degree
the petty internal political life that was floundering in
bewilderment and wallowing in disorder. On the inter­
national playground the stake was higher. One had to
remain on the field to save what could be saved. As to
internal politics, I knew very well that a strong gov­
ernment would quickly put in order the Socialists and
the anarchists, the decadents and wreckers and the in­
stigators of disorder. I knew at first hand their soul. It
has always been the same at all times, in all ages—it is
the spirit of coward wolves and ferocious sheep.
And thus one day, a few months after the Armistice,
I saw at Milan a fact more disquieting and more im­
portant than I thought possible. I saw a Socialist pro­
cession, with an endless number of red flags, with thirty

t>4

My Autobiography

bands, with ensigns cursing the war. I saw a river in the
street made of women, children, Russians, Germans,
and Austrians, flowing through the town upward and
downward from the popular quarters to those of the cen­
tre, and finally dispersing at one of the most central
points of the town, at the amphitheater of the Arena.
They had had numerous meetings. They clamored for
amnesty for the deserters! They demanded the division
of the land!
Milan was then considered, more than now, the city
where the pulse of the working nation could be felt. Mi­
lan, where 1 had labored with ideals, had experienced in
1914 and in the first months of 1915 epic days for the
war. The city always had a strong and gallant spirit.
In it citizenship was more active than in many other
parts of the country. It had known how to prepare itself
with dignity to sustain war effort. And now, after the
triumph, even this town, the town of the 10,000 volun­
teers, seemed to yield itself to a disease.
This procession I said was an evidence of the deep
mire in which all the classes of the population were sink­
ing, especially those belonging to the populari. As the
procession passed through the streets the bourgeois—
the shopkeepers, the hotel keepers—hastily closed their
windows and doors. They pulled down the roller blinds.
“There,” said I, “are eyes closing with the weariness
of anxiety and fear.”
Naturally enough, the revolutionists, observing their
effect, puffed up with new braggart triumph. Not a sin­
gle force, interventista or any other, set foot in the

Ashes and Embers

65

street to stop the irresponsibles. The beloved tricolor
flag of Italy was taken as a mark. It was hastily taken
off balconies!
I remember an episode in the shame of those days; a
woman, a school-teacher in the popular quarters, ran to
the defense of the Italian flag. Risking her life, she
stood with blazing eyes against a herd of communists.
You may be sure that in the period of redemption and
resurrection, when we stood upright again, the golden
medal for valor was bestowed on this woman of saintly
courage.
The Popolo d’ltalia, of which I was the founder and
editor, lived then its life of intense polemics. Every day
was a battle. The little street of Via Paolo da Conuobio
was constantly blocked by police or by detachments of
carabinieri and soldiers. All the staff were guarded
whenever we appeared in public. One could understand
that the government was anxious about us. The authori­
ties wanted to control all that the Popolo d’ltalia was
doing and to curb all agitation for virile methods in the
political struggle. The censorship was re-established ex­
clusively and solely for the Popolo d’ltalia. Through a
back-door channel a disgusting Socialist deputy tried
also to bring about an inquiry. His proposal was ridi­
culed out of the door.
I wrote, on the next day after the Procession of the
Defeat of Milan, an article the title of which was taken
from a famous polemical book of Giordano Bruno—
“Against the Return of the Beast.”
That article was published in the Popolo d’ltalia on

66

My Autobiography

the eighteenth of February and ended in these precise
words:
If the opposition to a war that is not only finished but
was victorious is now a pretext for an ignoble doubt, then
we who are not ashamed to have been interventiste, but feel
the glory of our position, will shout to the heavens, “Stand
back, you jackals!” No one shall separate the dead. They
constitute a sacred heap, as big as a gigantic pyramid that
touches the skies, a heap that belongs to nobody; nobody
can give or take away from the dead. They do not belong to
any party; they belong to the eternal motherland. They be­
long to a humanity too complex and too august to be put
into any wine club or into the back room of some co-opera­
tive. This political stew is supremely ignominious. Must we
be forced to defend our dead from filthy profanation? Oh,
Toti! Roman! One man! Thy life and thy death is worth
infinitely more than the whole Italian socialism! And you
files on parade—innumerable heroes that wanted the war,
knowing how to want war; who went to war knowing what
was war; who went to death knowing what it meant to go to
death—you, Decio Raggi, Filippo Corridoni, Cesare Battisti, Luigi Lori, Venezian, Sauro, Rismondi, Cantucci—
you thousands and thousands of others that form the superb
constellation of Italian heroism—don’t you feel that the
pack of jackals is trying to rummage your bones? Do they
want to scrape the earth that was soaked with your blood
and to spit on your sacrifice? Fear nothing, glorious spirits!
Our task has just begun. No harm shall befall you. We
shall defend ymu. We shall defend the dead, and all the dead,
even though we put dugouts in the public squares and
trenches in the streets of our city.

That was a warning blast—a trumpet call. Many, hit
in the face, fled. Some around us, trembling, thought
of the danger that they might get into on account of

Ashes and Embers

67

such a polemic. But some others—not many—gathered
around the old banner of my newspaper.
It was necessary to organize our resistance, to take
care in discussions of international character, to
strengthen our position on the front of internal politics,
to be guarded from false friends, to fight false pacifists
and to confound the false humanitarians. We had to
make a general assault upon all that bundle of various
degenerate tendencies, diverse in their appearance but
absolutely identical in their utter failure to understand
the logical and absolute meaning of the victory in war.
Our delegation in Paris was in a sorry strait. The
ability and the injustice of some of the Allied statesmen
had almost strangled it. Owing to our internal situation,
it was impossible for our delegation to take a firm
stand with feet well-planted. The regions to be restored
to Italy were in a state of restlessness that made many
of us anxious.
What a grave moment! An action of a handful of us
on the public square was not sufficient; there were so
many different fronts where one had to fight. We who
were to defend Italy from within had to create one
more unbreakable unity of strength, a common denom­
inator of all the old pro-war partisans and loyalists, of
all those who felt, like myself, desperately Italian. Then
it was that I decided, after days and nights of reflection,
to make a call through the medium of my newspaper
for a full stop in the stumbling career toward chaos.
And on the twenty-third of March, 1919, I laid down
the fundamental basis, at Milan, of the Italian fasci di
combat timento—the fighting Fascist programme.

68

My Autobiography

The first meeting of the Italian battle Fascists took
place on the Piazza S. Sepolero in Milan. It was in a
hall offered to us by the Milan Association of Mer­
chants and Shopkeepers. The permission was granted
after a long discussion among the managers of the as­
sociation. Common sense prevailed in the end; a guar­
anty was given that no noise or disorder would occur.
On that condition we got what we wanted.
The meeting was of a purely political character. I had
advertised in the Vo polo d’ltalia that it would have for
its object the foundation of a new movement and the
establishment of a programme and of methods of action
for the success of the battle I was intending to fight
against the forces dissolving victory and the nation.
I prepared the atmosphere of that memorable meet­
ing by editorials and summonses published in the Popolo
dItalia. Anyhow, the ones that came were not numer­
ous. One of my fighting friends of good will was in the
hall and he took the names of those who were willing to
sign up. After two days of discussion, fifty-four persons
signed our programme and took the pledge to he faith­
ful to the fundamental basis of our movement.
I speak of movement and not of party, because my
conception always was that Fascism must assume the
characteristics of being anti-party. It was not to be tied
to old or new schools of any kind. The name Italian
Fighting Fascisti was lucky. It was most appropriate to
a political action that had to face all the old parasites
and programmes that had tried to deprave Italy. I felt
that it was not only the anti-socialist battle we had to

Ashes and Embers

69

fight; this was only a battle on the way. There was a lot
more to do. All the conceptions of the so-called historical
parties seemed to be dresses out of measure, shape, style,
usefulness. They had grown tawdry and insufficient—
unable to keep pace with the rising tide of unexpected
political exigencies, unable to adjust to the formation of
new history and new conditions of modern life.
The old parties clung in vain to the rattling pro­
grammes. These parties had to make pitiful repairs and
tinkerings in an attempt to adapt their theories as best
they could to the new days. It was therefore not suf­
ficient to create—as some have said superficially—an
anti-altar to the altar of socialism. It was necessary to
imagine a wholly new political conception, adequate to
the living reality of the twentieth century, overcoming
at the same time the ideological worship of liberalism,
the limited horizons of various spent and exhausted de­
mocracies, and finally the violently Utopian spirit of
Bolshevism.
In a word, I felt the deep necessity of an original
conception capable of placing in a new period of history
a more fruitful rhythm of human life.
It was necessary to lay the foundation of a new civili­
zation.
To this end—through every day’s observation of
events and change, morning and evening, in vigor and
in weariness—I aimed all my strength. I had a per­
fect and sure consciousness of the end I was driving at.
This was my problem—to find the way, to find the mo­
ment, to find the form.

70

My Autobiography

Those discussions over which I presided and domi­
nated strengthened some of my conceptions that still
conserve to-day the freshness of the original idea. Later,
in this review of my life until now, I shall take up some
of the details of the evolution of our plans. At our meet­
ings there were present various elements—syndicalists,
old interventionists, demobilized officers still in uniform,
and many arditi, those brave grenade-and-knife shock
troops of the war.
The Italian arditi were a creation of the war. The
idea was born in Garibaldi’s impetuous, fighting vigor
and dash, and finds its remote origin in the heroic city
militias that flourished in many parts of Italy at the
happy time of the townships—the communes. The arditi
rendered first-class service during the war. They were
our troops of assault, of the first rush. They threw them­
selves into the battle with bombs in hands, with daggers
in the teeth, with a supreme contempt for death, sing­
ing their magnificent war hymns. There was in them not
only the sense of heroism but an indomitable will.
This typically Italian formation lived on after the
war. The first fighting Fascisti were formed mostly of
decided men. They were full of will and courage. In the
first years of the anti-socialist, anti-communist struggle,
the arditi war veterans played an important role. I was
several times nominated their chief and still hold the
title of honorary president of the Arditi association,
which has assumed now a purely relief character, with
the idea of maintaining intact its spirit of civic and mili­
tary virtues.

Ashes and Embers

71

Those who came to the meeting for the constitution of
the Italian Fascisti of Combat used few words. They
did not exhaust themselves by laying out dreams. Their
aim seemed clear and straight-lined. It was to defend
the victory at any price, to maintain intact the sacred
memory of the dead, and the admiration not only for
those who fell and for the families of those who were
dead but for the mutilated, for the invalids, for all those
who had fought. The prevalent note, however, was of
anti-socialist character, and as a political aspiration, it
was hoped a new Italy would be created that would
know how to give value to the victory and to fight with
all its strength against treason and corruption, against
decay within and intrigue and avarice from without.
There are some who profess not to understand what
Fascismo had as its intent, and some who believe that it
grew without a gardener. I was certain at the time that
it was necessary to fix, without any possibility of equivo­
cation, the essential brand of the new movement. For
this reason I made three planks for our platform. The
first was the following:
The meeting of the twenty-third of March sends its first
greeting and reverent thought to the sons of Italy who died
for the greatness of their country and for the freedom of the
world; to the mutilated and to the invalids, to all those who
fought, to the ex-prisoners who fulfilled their duty. It de­
clares itself ready to uphold with all its energy the material
and moral claims that will be put forward by the associations
of those who fought.

The second declaration pledged the Fascisti of Com­
bat to oppose themselves to the imperialism of any other

72

My Autobiography

countries damaging to Italy. It accepted the supreme
postulates of the League of Nations regarding Italy.
It affirmed the necessity to complete the stability of our
frontiers between the Alps and the Adriatic with the
claim of annexation of Fiume and of Dalmatia.
The third declaration spoke of the elections that were
announced for the near future. In this motion the Fasci
di Combattimento pledged themselves to fight with all
their means the candidates that were milk-and-water
Italians, to whatever party they belonged.
Finally we talked of organization—the organization
that would he adapted to the new movement. I did not
favor any bureaucratic cut-and-dried organization. It
was thought wise that in every big town the correspon­
dent of the Popolo d’Italia should be the organizer of
a section of the Fasci di Combattimento, with the idea
that each group should become a centre of Fascist ideas,
work and action. The first expenses—amounting to a
few thousand lire—were covered by the feeble resources
of the Popolo d’ltalia. A central committee was formed
to guide the whole movement.
It is amusing for me to recall that this meeting re­
mained almost unnoticed. The stupid irony of the So­
cialists and the narrow-minded incomprehensiveness of
the Italian Liberal party could not grasp its signifi­
cance.
The Cornere della Sera, that great liberal newspaper,
dedicated to this news about twenty lines in its columns!
The internal situation in Italian politics and Italian
policy continued to be nebulous and full of uncertainty.

Ashes and Embers

73

Disillusion and the shattering of ideals could be no­
ticed, even among those who had fought. A sense
of weariness dominated all classes—every one. The
Church, which had put herself apart during the great
European conflict, now started activity in order to have
her voice listened to at the peace negotiations and to
have a say about all the questions that interested the
nations that had taken part in the war.
So far as our national life was concerned, the Church
limited her action to the creation of the Partito Popolare—the so-called Popular, or Catholic, party. It was
faithful to some important programme points regarding
the family and religion and the nation. It represented
at that time an attempt to stop the prevalent diffusion
of those Bolshevik ideas of socialistic parliamentary
systems that were then disintegrating Rome and the
provinces. But the Partito Popolare itself ran off the
rails and jumped the fences; it tried to compete with
the Socialists themselves. Of little and doubtful patri­
otic faith, it ran square against the Fascisti and the interventisti. The Popular party, along with the others,
was too much in a hurry to close the parenthesis of the
war.
Political riots, disturbances and strikes took place
alternately in a kind of sickly rotation in every Italian
city.
It is necessary for me to review the conditions which
we faced. Orlando, president of the council, was inca­
pacitated by temperament to dominate the internal sit­
uation, just as he was unable to be a master in foreign

74

My Autobiography

affairs. His work was contradictory, full of false senti­
mentality and failure to comprehend the real interests
of Italy. Not knowing French, and ignorant of the
treaties concluded with the Allied nations, Orlando, in
spite of the presence of Sonnino, was a disastrous influ­
ence during the peace negotiations at Versailles. Wil­
son, so far as Italy was concerned, was ambiguous—so
much so that on the twenty-third of April the Italian
delegation had to leave Paris. It returned on the fifth
of May—a dubious situation. In June, after a vote of
the chamber, Ihe Orlando cabinet retired. In the mean­
time—also in June—serious clashes took place at Fiume
between French sailors and Italian soldiers.
Never did Italy have a man so damaging to the Ital­
ian interests and programmes as he who came next
—Nitti.
He was and remains a personality that is the nega­
tion of any ideal of life and of manly conflict. He has
a fairly good knowledge of finances. He is impudent
in his assertions. He is intensely egocentric. He al­
ways wants to play the most important part in cabi­
nets, whether he is president of the council or simply a
minister.
His first act when he came into power was the grant­
ing of an amnesty. This amnesty was followed by two
others. The first had a character of general principle
and I approved it, but by granting the two others Nitti
committed a great moral crime, for he abolished the dif­
ference between those who wore the ensigns of valor in
sacrifice and those who had basely betrayed the nation

Ashes and Embers

75

during the war and even had gone over to the enemy!
All the work of Nitti was fish-bait for the approba­
tion of the Socialists. He conceived the ambition of hold­
ing the presidency of a future Italian republic. His
measures, which wore demagogic dress, did not prevent
disorders or devastations sometimes brought about with
the cost of lives. He never would face Bolshevism and
the dissolutive forces in the open field. He had a decree
issued and signed by the King establishing the price of
bread; he had it withdrawn on the next day and replaced
by another decree, also signed by His Majesty.
There was no point in the national life that he failed
to bring up for discussion. All this puffed up the Social­
ists. They laughed in their sleeves as they foresaw a
strong political success for them at the elections. The
elections had to take place under the proportional sys­
tem ! The Socialists would become, through the election
battle, masters of Italian political life!
It seemed to me that the season was our summer of
torment and resolve.
In June, 1919, the Treaty of Peace with Germany
was consummated at Versailles. The event for Europe
was the end of a nightmare. The continual disillusionments, the reservations and the protests of Germany and
the diatribes between the Allies constituted a permanent
danger and a reason for anxiety for many nations. The
conclusion of the treaty was therefore for them a lib­
eration.
For Italy, on the contrary, it was a complete shatter­
ing of ideals. We had won the war; we were utterly

76

My Autobiography

defeated in the diplomatic battle. We were losing—ex­
cept Zara—the whole of Dalmatia, our land by tradition
and history, by manners and costumes, by the language
spoken and by the ardent and constant aspirations of
the Dalmatians toward the mother country. Fiume, most
Italian of cities, was contested. The colonial problem
was resolved for us in an absolutely negative way. To a
nation like ours, powerful and prolific, that has a need
of raw materials, of outlets, of markets and of land, on
account of the exuberance of its population, only some
insignificant rectifications of frontiers were granted
when the glut of colonial spoil was passed around.
I could feel the discontent oozing down through our
masses and infecting the combattenti themselves. Once
more Italy, who had thrown into the conflict men,
means, patrimony and youth, went out of a peace settle­
ment with empty hands and manifold disillusions.
The Nitti government, with its continuous note of
pessimism, was doing no better than to describe our sit­
uation as near to bankruptcy, economic as well as politi­
cal! Nitti himself, his newspapers and his acolytes, tried
to make the Italian people believe that the Versailles
Treaty was for us the best result obtainable. A sense of
humiliation had crawled over our whole peninsula, but
many there were who did not want to resign themselves
to accept the tragic facts. No one knows better than I
that many meditated, in sullen silence, most desperate
actions.
The government was watching the turn of the psy­
chological tide, while in the practical field it did not

Ashes and Embers

77

know what to do except to prepare and revise the mech­
anism of an election law by a vicious proportional
system. In the field of destruction it reached an unbe­
lievable decision to demobilize the aviation camps, and
to cap the climax, in August, 1919, the report of the
Commission of Inquiry on the painful episode of Capo­
retto was published.
I thought to myself, “This is fat on the fire!” The
Avanti, a socialist newspaper that for the time being
was published in three editions—one at Turin, one at
Rome and one at Milan—had started a ferocious cam­
paign against the army. On account of a strike of
typographers, the Avanti was the only newspaper pub­
lished in Rome for two months! During street demon­
strations, officers, merely because they were in uniform,
were insulted and assaulted. Charity toward the dignity
of the nation prevents my presentation of episodes that
now make the worst blackguards blush. The few Fas­
cisti that had accomplished an act of faith in March,
1919, now met in all their work enormous difficulties.
They were isolated, attacked, spied upon, sometimes by
the subversives, sometimes by the government.
Every day in the Popolo d’ltalia I wrote about the
painful bath of fire of the combattenti, about the in­
flamed pride of the volunteers, about the necessity of
concord, about the sordid hostility of the government
that did not feel the beauty and the greatness of the
sense of patriotic heroism. Gabriele D’Annunzio, the
poet, who lived in Rome, wrote that his approbation “of
my good shots was trembling with admiration.”

78

My Autobiography

Victory was losing her laurel leaves every day in spite
of all. The national parliament was discussing and ap­
proving the new election laws. Disorders and blackmail­
ing of the government were on the daily calendar. The
debates had a character of pettiness and gossip and the
flavor of a base world that knew nothing of war, virtue
or heroism.
“Elections! Elections! Elections!” thought I. “These
constitute the only subject that is able to rise to its feet
in the Italian parliament!”
Incidents had taken place at Eiume between Italians
and French sailors, and Ihe population of that city did
not hide its growing hostility toward the Allies. The
latter therefore planned to have the city garrisoned by
a mixed corps of their troops. So Fiume, a city purely
of virile Italian stamp, had a mosaic of troops. It
was the summit of inefficiency and, what is more, of
stupidity.
D’Annunzio, who was trembling in his solitude, told
me that he contemplated with grim brooding the taking
of Fiume by force. There was no other way of salvation.
Everything seemed to be lost. There were only a hand­
ful of men with the poet. But they were the most trust­
worthy elements of our army. They were old volunteers.
They were Fascists who felt once again in the incandes­
cent atmosphere of the streets of Rome and other cities
the poetry of the war and of the victory. They started,
armed, from Ronchi.
The occupation of Fiume, at the moment when the
English sailors were getting ready to evacuate it, was

Ashes and Embers

79

rapid and startling. The government, as soon as it
knew the truth, wanted to rush to offset the raid. It
meditated a blockade, it sent thunder against the reb­
els. But D’Annunzio and his legionaries, having pre­
pared their action in silence, now threw down a gauntlet
of audacious challenge to the Nitti an triflings.
Gabriele d’Annunzio, before starting from Ronchi,
wrote me the following letter:
Dear Companion: The dice are on the table. To-morrow
I shall take Fiume with force of arms. The God of Italy
assist us!
I arise from bed with fever. But it is impossible to delay.
Once more the spirit dominates the miserable flesh.
Sum up the article that the Gazetta del Popolo will pub­
lish ; give the end in full.
Sustain the cause without stint during the conflict.
I embrace you,
II September, 1919.
Gabrielle
d’Annunzio.
The Italian atmosphere, so long checked and hu­
miliated, exploded like Vesuvius after the announce­
ment of the new D’Annunzio gesture. Again we heard
the tune of high sentiments of fraternity and of enthu­
siasm. Again we felt the spirit of May, 1915. The best
of our manhood felt the breath of poetry that came from
this sacred liberation carried on in the face of the policy
of the Nittian government.
The Fascisti were amongst the ardent legionaries of
Fiume, while at home they were leading resistance
against the defeatists, old and new. The Italian colonists
all over the world—these colonists who had followed
with anxiety and with unspeakable fright the negotia­

80

My Autobiography

tions of Versailles—sent money in great quantity for
D’Annunzio’s expedition. Fiume felt an intuition of its
salvation. There were manifestations of frantic enthu­
siasm. Audacity had repaired injustice; the city was
strongly held, so that it could resist by force of arms and
with courage all the Nittian or international interfer­
ence.
The president of the council, Nitti, in parliament on
this occasion, took an ignoble attitude. He summoned
up the dangerous idea of protest by a general strike. By
his ambiguous language he invited the classes which
leaned toward socialism, and especially the Socialists
and radicals themselves, to agitate for street demonstra­
tions against D’Annunzio’s enterprise.
Nitti, after conversations with Trumbic, the Jugo­
slav minister, saw all his tangled and slimy net of
humiliating understandings going to pieces through the
will of a few brave boys.
Nitti thought and acted only as a consequence of
physical fear. Attacked full front and exasperated in
his mad and miserable dream, he plotted with every
means to overcome the resistance of the Fiumean legion­
aries. The soldiers were declared deserters. The city was
blockaded so that economic pressure would squeeze the
spirit of the citizens. Parliament was closed and the elec­
tions were fixed for November 16, 1919, under the
troublesome proportional system.
The elections re-established, for a moment, an appar­
ent truce. Every party wanted to measure the masses
and the groupings. The Socialists, who were speculating

From a photograph by Brown Brothers.

Commander Gabriele d’Annunzio.

Ashes and Embers

81

on the misfortunes of the war and were pointing to the
danger of another war due to the D’Annunzian enter­
prise, were the favorites. The Church, which in politics
always has an ambiguous attitude, urged on the activity
of the priests in the villages so that the Partito Popolare, which had been created originally by the lay Catho­
lics, in service of the church policy, might play the
preponderant part in parliament. The Liberals, Demo­
crats and some radicals built up a block that passed
under the name of the Forces of Order. They were
changeable forces, without any ideal base and without
precise aims. They were another grouping among
groupings whose futilities I had observed for years.
I wanted the Fascisti to try alone the chance of the
elections. We did not ally ourselves with any other
party, even with the nearest to them—the Nationalists.
The atmosphere was against us, but it was necessary to
count our own heads. It was necessary to know, even
through the means of elections, what point had been
reached by the Italian nation in moral disintegration
and in moral reawakening as a victorious nation. I cre­
ated an electoral committee with little means, but with
ample courage. I ordered meetings for the principal
towns of Italy and especially in Milan.
I remember so vividly the meeting on the Piazza Beligioioso. How typical it was! The place was a lone­
some corner of old Milan, where from a camion that was
used for a tribune on a dark night, by the light of
torches, I addressed a big, closely pressed crowd. They
were people not only from Milan but from other towns.

85

My Autobiography

The Fascisti of Bologna, of Turin, of Rome and of
Naples had in fact sent their representatives in order to
have precise rules and sure orders for the impending
electoral battle.
I made on this occasion some declarations of prin­
ciples that still stand in the Fascist line. They have
served me as a guide in all my political actions.
I said that revolutions were not to be denied a priori;
that they might be discussed. I said that the Italian peo­
ple could not copy Russian Bolshevism. We have in the
history of our political struggles our own elements of
greatness of concept. These have given to the spirit of
the time all the strength of their Italian genius and the
qualities of their Italian courage.
“If a revolution,” said I, “has to take place, it is nec­
essary to make one typically Italian, on the magnificent
dimensions of the ideas of Mazzini and with the spirit of
Carlo Pisacane.”
I had already in my mind, clear and strong, the con­
cept of complete rebellion against the decrepit old state
that did not of itself know how to die.
The elections of the sixteenth of November took place
and the Fascisti were beaten. I faced, and all of us
faced, complete defeat. Not one of us had the necessary
votes to become a member of parliament. Some Nation­
alists saved themselves in Rome and were later excellent
interpreters of the national idea in the wallow of general
bewilderment. At Milan, I was a long way off from the
number of votes necessary to be elected. It was tragic,
our record, but in the passage of time it is amusing and
may be remembered by all losers.

Ashes and Embers

83

Our uneasiness was now profound. The crowd was
anti-Fascist. Under the skin of the population a sad
illusion was being fed; in their minds a dark hope was
stirring. The coming of Bolshevism! The plan for seiz­
ing the means of production, the installation of the
soviets in Italy!
The Avanti had already published the general scheme
and its details. My defeat did not bother me out of any
personal consideration. It gave me a clear and precise
idea of the desperateness of our situation. The Socialist
newspaper wrote on that occasion a short notice about
me: “A dead body has been fished up from the Naviglio.” It was said in this note that in the night, in the
modest Naviglio canal that cuts Milan in two, a dead
body had been picked up. According to the documents
they said it could be identified as the dead body of Be­
nito Mussolini—liis political corpse. They did not say
that its eyes were gazing ahead.
Amidst the general feast of their victory the Socialists
did not forget to imitate a regular funeral. This parade
passed through the streets with a coffin, surrounded
with burning candles. There were ribald psalms on the
air. The strange procession, however, showed the dis­
tress and shoddiness of its ranks; it passed up and down
the city of Milan—a city that had become now the abso­
lute property of the Socialists. The procession passed
under the windows of my house, where my family was
living in anxiety amidst the general anxieties and with
violence trembling in the air. I have not forgotten the
episode, but I always see it in its frame—the frame of
the misery and of the threadbareness of the paraders.

84

My Autobiography

The elections had given 150 seats to the Socialists in
parliament. They were themselves frightened by their
staggering success. The situation was saved by the
South of Italy—always more faithful to men than to
organized mass parties.
The victory, of course, swelled up in most Socialists
a desire to dominate. It distended their impudent abuse
of power. Enormous processions with red flags, howling
in the streets, strikes called not for protest but for cele­
bration, occupied a whole week.
At Milan a crowd of 30,000 demanded that the red
flag should be exposed on the Municipal building. Dur­
ing the cock-crowing over victory, all institutions, rules
and regulations and orderly life were upset.
Nobody thought about work. That last of all! Only
an audacious handful formed by Fascisti, arditis and
Fiumean elements resisted the intoxication. An incident
was provoked because of this. Bombs were thrown, a
few were killed and many wounded. A commission of
Socialist members of parliament, headed by Filippo Turati, marched up the stairs of the Prefetura, the gov­
ernor’s office of Milan, to claim my arrest and the
arrest of the Fascisti chiefs.
That was an episode of political partisanship useless
and evil. The authorities showed weakness and fear.
They wanted to give satisfaction to the Socialists. But
toy clear and straight-lined political action did not suf­
fer from this abuse of power. Having been let out after
only one day of imprisonment, I consulted with my
associates as to the whole work before us. What should

Ashes and Embers

85

we do now? How could we act before llic damage to
Italy became irreparable?
The electoral tragedy had broken up our ecu Ira.I com­
mittees. Many of us had been arrested; many, threat­
ened, had disappeared. Little by little, calm having been
restored, I rewove at the Popolo d’ltalia the fabric of
our cause and tried to build again the structure of our
organization. In various meetings I explained the grav­
ity of the Italian situation. I spoke independently of
the particular attitude of the Fascisti.
The victory of the Socialists was a danger, not so
much because of the fact itself as because of the phe­
nomenal retreat to their holes of all the weak and the
incapables which followed the day after the Socialist
victory. That victory crushed the Liberals and the Dem­
ocrats. For some time a low furtive literature of propa­
ganda had spread stories about disquieting episodes in
the defeated German and Austrian countries. This lit­
erature spun narratives about professors obliged to be­
come servants and scullions, Russian princesses engaged
as ballet dancers, generals who were selling matches on
the streets. All this put together with the Socialist vic­
tory produced a wave of fright in all classes, and I could
see a serious fact of corruption and political paralysis.
The old parties had been beaten by pussyfoot socialism.
That socialism had no aim. It was victorious only
through cowardice in the others and because of the gen­
eral uneasiness in the population. Certainly it did not
win on any declaration of a great faith.
I did not fold under the smallest edge of my flag.

8G

My Autobiography

From my editor’s office that was getting barer and
barer, to my readers that were getting fewer and fewer,
I addressed the most bitter and severe exhortations to
resist, resist, resist.
I made a little fortress out of the editor’s office. The
newspaper was sequestrated and censored every day;
but notwithstanding difficulties and lack of means, I
succeeded in keeping the little paper alive. I was throt­
tled by the skinny hand of poverty. I could have sold
out, but I held on.
So that I might be completely withdrawn from cir­
culation, various messengers of the Nittian government
came to me advising me to go and study the autonomous
republics of Southern Russia. I understood the double
game. They acted with me as they acted with D’Annun­
zio when they advised him to try the flight from Rome
to Tokio. But D’Annunzio was now still resisting at
Fiume, and I, with my newspaper, was renewing and
reassembling the dispersed ranks of the Fascisti. I held
meetings constantly. Not for a moment did I cease my
activity. It cannot be said that I failed to look the tri­
umphant beast in the face.
One day, just after the elections, I had to go per­
sonally because of postal regulations to the money-order
window of the main post office in Milan. I was to re­
ceive some considerable contributions that Italians from
oversea colonies were sending for the Fiume enterprise.
In the huge buildings of the Central Post Office one
could still see visible signs of the elections—the murmur
of the discussions, the stenciled inscriptions on the walls

Ashes and Embers

87

were all there. I presented myself with my brother, Arnaldo, at the window of the money-order office.
The Bolshevik clerk, with evident irony, said I had
to make myself known. He did not know any “certain
Benito Mussolini.” A short discussion arose that at­
tracted other Bolshevik elements, who amused them­
selves by affirming that nobody knew Benito Mussolini.
The development of this discussion, impudently pro­
voking, was stopped by an old clerk of the post office, a
faithful servant of the state who certainly was not in­
toxicated by the Socialist success.
He said, “Pay this money transfer. Do not be silly.
Mussolini has a name that is not only known now here
but will be known and judged all over the world.”
I have never learned the name of this gentleman. He
was straight and fair.
Some symptoms of reaction against the Socialist vic­
tory were to be noticed now. One day at the editor’s
office of the newspaper, facing the anxieties of my as­
sociates and the doubts of some half-hearted ones in my
service, I felt it necessary to disclose my own hopes and
faiths:
“Don’t fear. Italy will heal herself from this illness.
But without our watchfulness it might be deadly. We
will resist! Resist! I should say so! Indeed, within two
years I will have my turn!”

CHAPTER VI

the death struggle of a wornout

DEMOCRACY

HAVE little doubt that all inefficient party and
parliamentary governments die from the same
causes and with the same, typical mannerisms of
decay.
I have watched one die and have been present to hear
the raucous drawings of its last breaths. But these were
times which tried the souls of us. We saw passing be­
fore our eyes the dreadful panorama of chaos and of
evil forces which had broken into a gallop, ridiculous to
behold, tragic beyond words to one who loved his coun­
try. Above all, these forces were trivial and insincere.
The political elections of November 16, 1919, had
painted and glossed over Italian political life with a
mere veneer of quiet. Not one of the weighty problems
of domestic or foreign policy for which a quick, brave
solution was needed had yet even been put under the
microscope for study. Everything was boiled up in the
joust of political parties. There was the usual seething
of inconsequential prophecy about the new ministerial

I

combinations.

The Socialists dominated the scene. They contin88

A Worn-Out Democracy

89

ually harassed the government, while it was concerned
on account of the attitude of the extreme left—com­
munists.
The occasion of the crown speech, at the beginning
of the twenty-first legislature, was upon us. For this
ceremony there had been some worry on the part of
Nitti. He tried to hold the Socialists in check. But they
could not help showing their cold hostility to the king.
I was told in advance that they would refuse to be pres­
ent in the hall during the king’s speech.
On the day of the opening of the chamber, when the
king was solemnly entering the Hall of Parliament,
what was the demonstration? The Socialists made a
parade of their pinks in their buttonholes and went out
in groups, singing the Hymn of Workers and the In­
ternationale. With them, making a clumsy show of
doubtful political taste, filed the Republicans, the In­
dependents, and members of the Left.
The speech of the crown did not take a clear position
against the subversive forces which were menacing noth­
ing less than our whole national unity. It forgot the
question of Fiume—a torch which held out a flame for
our national spirit. The speech even renounced some
sovereign prerogatives. It conceded a good share of the
crown patrimony, in behalf of the war veterans, com­
batants and wounded, for they also were full of evident
signs of restlessness. Furthermore, in a period when
foreign policies were in a snarl and the economic crisis
serious indeed, I could see little else besides the petty
shifts and maneuvers of parliamentary cloakrooms and

90

My Autobiography

corridors in the same old disgusting struggle to grab
places in the Ministry.
During the first three months the Ministry of Nitti
fell three times at the chamber. It outlived itself and
then succeeded itself.
The Stampa, an old Piedmont newspaper, liberal in
character, began to he willing to indict the war. It began
an attempt to carry in triumph the very man who was
the breeder and teacher of neutrality—Giovanni Gio­
litti. The Church, together with the Popular party,
wanted to draw the utmost profit from the abnormal
situation. The Socialists revealed themselves very badly
prepared for their victory. Victory had only set them
down in a marsh of trouble; I knew that they could not
create an equilibrium between the communists and the
extreme right. On one side it was the nation; on the
other politics—inefficient, empty politics.
Meanwhile Gabriele d’Annunzio, in Fiume, was re­
sisting with his legionaries the flatteries of political se­
cret agents who, we all knew, were pouring into Fiume,
and was resisting also the blockade. Fascism was again
setting in order its disunited ranks, after the electoral
defeat of November 16, 1919, and the light was every­
where dim and the atmosphere murky with selfish,
small, cowardly breathings.
Nevertheless, we began to see our way through.
To reorganize the ranks of Fascism was not a matter
of impossible difficulty, because the Fasci di Combatti­
mento—Bundles of Fight—had learned discipline and
enthusiasm; we could stand our shocks from mere elec­

A Worn-Out Democracy

91

toral vicissitudes. And on the other hand, some stra­
tegic leadership began to show itself at Florence, where,
in October, 1919, there was held the first international
meeting of the Italian Fasci di Combattimento. What a
characteristic meeting! The adherents were obliged to
defend the liberty of assembling by the voice of the
revolver. Florence, a city with a tradition of kindness
and hospitality, received the Fascists with violent hos­
tility. Ambushes! Provocations! Nevertheless, the meet­
ing was held. Our friends were able to control the place.
By great energy they broke down resistance and sup­
pressed the unprovoked violence of our opponents.
The meeting of Florence wrote the real problem of
government across the sky. On October ninth, by way
of starting that sky writing, I made an unadorned
speech. I made clear appeal to the subversive forces of
the nation. On the next day, after a sharp, needlepointed speech by the poet F. T. Marinetti, the secre­
tary, Pasella, presented a resolution in which the Fasci
di Combattimento claimed the right to formulate for
Italy a fundamental transformation of the state. It was
a clearly defined programme of political convenience
and expediency, aiming to create an absolutely new so­
cial and economic state.
I have interpreted and carried out that purpose. If
the end I now seek is to disclose the paths which have led
to the development of the self I am, then surely it was
during this period of training and test, of trial and error,
that the most significant guideposts may be found.
The programme of the Fasci was approved to a man.

92

My

Autobiography

There, indeed, was the disclosed warning of the Fascist
regime to come. To the regime’s problem, however, there
was being added—and sharp it was—the problem of the
syndicates. For that reason, during the afternoon sit­
ting of October tenth, I myself proposed a resolution
which declared “adhesion to the movement of economic
deliverance and autonomy of the worker.” We sent a
greeting “to all those numerous groups of proletarians
and employes who are not willing to submit to the lead­
ership of political parties composed and controlled
chiefly by little and big mediocrity which is now trying,
by impoverishing and mystifying the masses, to gain
applause and salaries.” I often wonder if other nations
do not feel the same.
The whole spirit of that meeting, which closed with a
greeting for Fiume, was such as to rivet the old concep­
tion of the irreconcilable character of the fight.
I arrived at Florence, coming from Fiume, where I
had gone by airplane. There had been a long, affec­
tionate and definite heart-to-heart talk with Gabriele
d’Annunzio about all that needed to be done in Italy.
On my journey back, the plane, on account of the
bora—a violent wind of the Upper Adriatic—was
obliged to come down on the aviation field of Aiello, in
the province of Udine. Chafing under the delay, I con­
tinued my journey to Florence by train, where I came
just in time to preside at the meeting and to take what
may be called a lively part in our resistance against the
violence of our opponents. At bottom, I was the most
harassed in spirit of all who were there. But to the

A Worn-Out Democracy

93

ryi'H of the glowing crowd I was a patriot, a preacher
nl resistance, he who succeeded, through the violent arti­
cles written from day to day in the Popolo d’ltalia, in
heginning the smashing of Bolshevism. The meeting
was ended in Fascist style; we swore to see one another
again; we promised ourselves victory at any price.
1 set out from Florence by auto, to go to Romagna.
The machine was driven by Guido Pancani, well known
in Florence in his capacity of war volunteer and air­
plane pilot—a great athlete. In the same machine there
were also the brother-in-law of Pancani, Gastone Galvani, and Leandro Arpinati, of the railway workshops
of Bologna, since then well known in the political clubs.
When we came to Faenza the auto stopped before the
Orpheum Coffee Shop, where I met and greeted some
old friends of mine. On continuing the trip, the auto,
driven at full speed, crashed into a railway crossing
with closed gates. Under our terrible impact the first
iron railing was broken to bits and the auto was hurled
over the rails onto the second barrier. We were all,
with the exception of the driver, Pancani, flung yards
away, like toy men. I, who came out unhurt, and Ar­
pinati, who had been lightly bruised, went shouting
for help for our two friends, who were groaning in
agony. People arrived, the injured men were laid down
in our auto, which, dragged by oxen, conveyed the two
wounded to the hospital of Faenza. During the surgical
treatments I also helped the two patients. I did what I
could to comfort them. Finally I departed again by
train to Bologna. The incident might have had greater

94

My Autobiography

consequences, but fortune assisted me; I felt that the
hatred of our adversaries had been my talisman.
Already I have told how, after the electoral defeat of
November 16, 1919, some of my friends were terrified
and others asserted how useless it was to go against the
stream. They said—for there are always minds of this
type—that it was much better to come to an agreement
with the opposition, which in those days held all strategic
political positions and dominated the parliament. Com­
promise, negotiation and agreements were offered me.
I rejected flatly any agreement whatever. I did not
admit even one moment’s thought of coming to a cove­
nant with those who had repudiated our Italy in war
and now were betraying her in peace. Not many under­
stood me—not even those close to me. Two of my
editors on the Popolo d’ltalia, my newspaper, asked
permission to leave. They made their excuses on the
grounds that they had moved from their political streets
and house numbers. They even accused me of having
helped myself—during the electoral fight—with funds
gathered by the Popolo d’ltalia in the cause of smart­
ing Fiume. So I have seen myself—a bitter experience
—obliged to defend myself from those who had been my
friends.
I appeared before the convention of the Lombardian
journalists, demanding opportunity to hear and be
heard as to the charges made. My justification was am­
ple and precise. The board was forced by the facts to do
me justice. And afterward, without waiting for the hour
of my triumphs, the self-same slanderers, it is fair to
say, made honorable amends for their errors.

A Worn-Out Democracy

95

But meanwhile, taking a pretext from this episode,
I here was launched against me the furious wrath of the
Socialists and of the members of the Popular party, led
by the priests. Ferrets were sent to smell into my life.
Soldiers and police were bribed. Secret inquiries were
made into my every-day routine, into all my acts, all
my beliefs. The deluded, the rejected, the unmindful—
all whom my upright and fierce soul had fired at in some
way or another—gathered against me. They could do
nothing. In spite of the length and breadth of the inves­
tigation, up high and down low, no dragon was dredged
out of my pool. As for the disposition of the funds for
the Fiume campaign, and other unworthy calumnies, I
published in my newspaper documents and testimony
which could never be refuted.
The conclusion arrived at then has been and always
will be the same until I cease to exist: on the score of
integrity there is no assault to he made upon me. My
political work may be valued more or less, this way or
that, and people may shout me up or howl me down,
but in the moral field it is another matter. Men must
live in harmony with the faith by which they are pushed
on; they must be inspired by the most absolute disinter­
estedness. True men, in politics, must be animated by
Ihe humane and devout sense; they must have a regard,
a love toward and a deep vision regarding their own
l e l l o w creatures. And all these qualities must not be
d e l i l e d by dissimulations or rhetoric or flatteries or com­
p r o m i s e s or servile concessions. On this ground, at least,
I mu proud to know myself as one not to be suspected

96

My Autobiography

—even by myself—and feeling that my inmost moral
fiber is invincible.
I believe that this, above all else, has been the stuff
and fabric of my strength and of my success.
The beginning of 1920 found Italy engaged with a
most difficult international situat ion. While in Paris the
diplomats were sordidly debating, the bleeding wound
of Dalmatia was yet open, and in it was D’Annunzio
at Fiume. The Socialists, to be sure, bad obtained a
boisterous electoral victory, but; they proved from day
to day more and more impotent and incapable of main­
taining their positions in government, with dignity. The
most temperate were overturned by the extremists.
There was the gorgeous myth of Lenin 1 The Italian
Liberal party had resigned all its prerogatives. The
ministry was living from day to day, at the mercy of
political extortions, of blackmail, of those who wanted
special favors. There was turbulence in parliament and
uproars of political nature on the streets.
Under such conditions it was necessary to struggle,
even though sometimes victory seemed very difficult and
almost unattainable. I started the year by an article en­
titled “Let’s Navigate.” I said: “Two religions are to­
day contending with each other for the sway over the
world—the black and the red. From two vaticans depart
to-day encyclical letters—from that of Rome and from
that of Moscow. We declare ourselves the heretics of
these two expressions. We are exempt from contagion.
The issue of the battle is of secondary importance to
us. To us the fight has the prize in itself, though it be

A Worn-Out Democracy

97

iml crowned by victory. The world now has some
.-.I range analogy with that of Julian the Apostate. The
Galileo with the red hair! Will he he a winner again? Or
will the winner be the Mongol Galileo of the Kremlin?
Will there be realized the upsetting of all valiant and
virile thought?
“These questions weigh upon the uneasy spirits of our
contemporaries.
“But in the meantime it is necessary to steer the ship!
Even against the stream. Even against the flow. Even
if shipwreck is waiting for the solitary and haughty
hearers of heresy.”
There was little time to spare for dwelling upon these
highbrow controversies. Events were tumbling over
themselves in a most troubled way. In the month of Jan­
uary, after harsh discussion, it appeared impossible to
avoid a threatened railway strike. Soon after, the general
strike of the post and telephone employees burst out and
lasted six days. It disorganized not only the private in­
terests of citizens but also state communications. It cut
off the shuttle of thoughts in a moment made even more
delicate by the international situation. The Avanti, the
official newspaper of the Socialist party, of which I had
once been editor, wrote on that occasion that the post,
telegraph and telephone offices were a luxury of modem
times; that the ancient peoples had been great even withoul. telegraphic apparatus. Who knows whether this
gibberish came from a mocking spirit or from the kind
of confirmed idiocy with which extremists are afflicted?
The stated cause of the agitations was always eco­

98

My Autobiography

nomic, but in truth the end was wholly political; the real
intention was to strike a blow full in the face of the
state’s authority, against the middle classes and against
disciplined order, with a view to establishing the soviets
in Italy. That was the plain purpose behind all the orna­
ments and masks. It is little realized how easily a com­
bination of disorders can put a whole nation—by con­
trol of its exchanges and its communications and cities
—in the hands of a tyrannous minority.
In the midst of general hardships and of cowardice,
of grumbling of impotents, of the vaporings of dull
critics, I, almost alone, had the courage to write that the
state’s employees, if they were right in view of the
feebleness of tbe government, were wrong, in any case,
toward the nation. To inflict upon a people the morti­
fication of an ill-advised strike, to trample upon the
rights of the whole, meant to lead men from modern
civil life back again to tribal conflict.
“These dissensions,” I wrote in my paper on January
15, 1920, “are between function and government. The
sufferer who suffers after having paid, the sufferer, with
the inevitable prospect of paying more, is the Italian
nation—the word ‘nation’ understood in the sense of
human collectivity.” And further on I added: “The ma­
terial damages of a strike of this kind are enormous,
incalculable. But the moral damages at home and abroad
are still greater. The moment chosen for the strike gives
to the strike itself the true and proper character of a
support to Allied imperialism. This is the culminating
moment of the negotiations in Paris. This is the moment

A Worn-Out Democracy

99

in which there is the one question—to get, finally, a
peace. Why didn’t the postal, the telegraph and tele­
phone operators wait two weeks more, until the return
of Nitti from Paris? Was it just ‘written,’ was it just
‘fatal,’ that the ultimatum to the government should fall
due on the thirteenth? All this confirms the sinister po­
litical character of the act.”
As God pleased, on January twenty-first, the post
and telegraph strike was ended, but already there had
begun, on the nineteenth of January, a railway strike. It
was a useless strike. The leaders of red syndicalism had
been willing to proclaim it at any price, even when it
was against both the sentiment and the interest of the
workmen themselves. I defined this strike as “an enor­
mous crime against the nation.” The country was in des­
olation. Italy was in the claws of disorder and violence;
the foreigners left our charming resorts and byways;
the withholding of credit grew general among bankers,
while catastrophic rumors held sway over the interna­
tional world, entangling more and more our diplomatic
negotiations.
In the midst of the most unbridled egoism, the Fas­
cists firmly held their places during the strikes of the
public services. I will not forget that some groups of our
men, inspired by faith, thoroughly did their duty dur­
ing these agitations. They faced with firm boldness the
insults and threats of their striking fellow countrymen.
Meanwhile, in the face of the righteous indignation of
public opinion, some Socialists began to feel timid. They
tried to separate their responsibility from that of the

100

My Autobiography

leaders who had proclaimed the strike. On that occasion,
in the Popolo d’ltalia of January twenty-first, I pub­
lished an article entitled “Too Late!” I thrust into the
light—with words that later on revealed themselves pro­
phetic—the real situation of socialism.
“The Turatians,” I wrote—“and hy this word we in­
tend all those who in Filippo Turati, the leader of the
Right, recognize their chief—should have been awak­
ened before. Now the car is thrown upon the steep slope
and the reformist’s brake is creaking, but it does not
hold; nay, it exhausts the strength of those who are
dragging on the lever. At the bottom there is the im­
pregnable massive wall against which the car will break
to pieces. Out of the ruin will come wisdom. This was
said also by the French fabulist, La Fontaine:
A quelque chose malheur est bon: a mettre un sot a,
la raison.
“It would be preferable, nevertheless, that the block­
heads might restore their reason without plunging the
nation into destruction and misery.”
The railway strike was protracted up to January
twenty-ninth, and all the time diplomatic discussions
were bringing us to disastrous compromises in our for­
eign policy. About this time, into the aridity of the dis­
putes of classes there was thrust an event colored with
highest idealism. It was arranged that the suffering chil­
dren of Fiume should be brought to Milan. They had
been enduring the hardships of a blockaded town, with­
out economic resources; they were at the mercy of their
own distress. Already the children of Vienna, the sons
of our enemies, had obtained in Milan kind treatment.

A Worn-Out Democracy 101
it not admissible that there should be found love
and pity for the Italian infants of Quarnero? The epi­
sode of kindness, brought about by the Fascists with the
consent of the Fiume command, resounded throughout
I l a ly. Great manifestations of joy greeted these chil­
dren at every junction or way station of their jour­
ney. The censors of the press, however, prevented us
I'rom writing of the triumphal journey of these chil­
dren. It was all part and parcel of a programme sys­
tematically to slander our spirit, which always stamped
Ihe political handicraft of Nitti, like an ugly hall-mark
on a leaden spoon.
This man, in order to justify his vile and inept di­
plomacy, dared to deliver in the chamber a speech on
the Fiume question with a friendly intonation toward
the Slavians, at the very time that Wilson was pressing
his even stranger project to create of Fiume and Zara
two isolated, detached, aborted free cities under the con­
trol and the authority of the League of Nations!
On the next day, February eighth, my newspaper
bore on the first page the following head-line: “The
Abominable Speech of H. E. Cagoia—The Snail.” By
this surname Gabriele d’Annunzio had stamped F. S.
Nitti and the term had become popular. Following the
head-line was a short editorial of mine, entitled “Miser­
able.” In it, after having set forth again in a few words
the painful history of the negotiations in Paris, I con­
cluded :
Wjis

The truth is that Nitti is preparing to go back again. He
goes to Paris in order to give away his shirt. Before the stub­
born Juglo-Slavian irreconcilableness our Cagoia knows

102

My Autobiography

nothing better than to wail, weep and—yield. The whole tone
of his speech is vile, dreadfully vile. Not in vanquished Ger­
many, nor in Austria, has there been so vile a Minister as
Nitti. If there had been one, he could not have lasted. This
one is the Minister of runaways, of autolesionists; he is the
Minister of Modigliani, the man of peace at any price. By
trying to remember continually that Hie objectives of Italy
were Trento and Triest, Cagoia offers arms to the Jugo­
slavian resistance.
The peace of 1866, in comparison, is a masterpiece with
that offered by 11 is Indecency. On bis next journey to Paris,
Cagoia will make another renunciation. Zara? Valona? Who
knows? Quite likely. II is nol impossible that lie will yield
Gorizia too. Perhaps also Monfahone. And why not the line
of Tagliamento? Maybe only by this price can we hope for
the friendship of Jugo-Slavia!
Before such infamy we feel Unit il would be preferable to
be citizens of the Germany of Noske than subjects of the
Italy of Cagoia.
We have before us days of dolor and shame; worse than
those of Caporetto, worse than those of Abba Carima!
We will recover our strength, but firs! there is some one
who will be forced to pay.

The domestic policies and the foreign policies pursued
by the government of that time did not fail to provoke
some stiff discussions among those newspapers that were
reflecting the varied tendencies of national life. The
Stampa, at the head of which was Senator Frassati, who
some time later was to be selected as ambassador to
Berlin, was one of my targets. I violently attacked it
because of the programme it adopted. It gave itself airs
as if it would be the redeemer of our fatherland. It is
necessary to remember that Senator Frassati had been
against the entrance of Italy into the World War. He

A Worn-Out Democracy

103

always stood apart during the most bleeding and tragic
periods of Italian life. Consequently, he was the least
capable of taking a pose as redeemer of our fatherland
at the time when peace was to be concluded with the
enemies after the victorious end of our war.
The Cornere della Sera, representing and interpret­
ing the thought of a great flow of so-called liberal public
opinion, was defending arbitration for Fiume and Dal­
matia, proposed by Wilson and supported by the prose
of Albertini, who followed a pernicious policy inspired
by Salvemini and Nitti. The Avanti, the red publica­
tion, availed itself of all these polemics and of the slan­
ders against me to libel me in general before the whole
of public opinion. And all this campaign, vain and in­
effectual, was even supported by the press of the Popu­
lar party. But more important, it was employed against
the raising of Fascism and against the war victory.
Strikes were characterized by violent, disgraceful
clashes between police and soldiers and the citizens; the
interminable parliamentary discussions were marked by
fist fights on the floor of the chamber. These were pitiful
spectacles, humiliating not only to citizenship and to
government itself but to the whole fabric of our political
life.
In the short cycle of a few months there had heen
three ministerial crises, but Nitti always came back to
power. The question, as always in a democracy gone
drunk with compromise of principles, was one of mu­
tual concessions, and very heavy ones. Miserable. Use­
less. Nobody was thinking of the rebuilding of social

104

My Autobiography

order in a nation which had won a bloody war and which
had to face the fact that it was living in the presence of
a world of moving realities.
Fascism, unique lighthouse in a sea of cowardice, of
compromise and of foggy, plum-colorcd idealism, had
engaged itself in battles; it was overpowered by mere
blind multitudes. I was the bull’s-eye of the target of
the government of Nitti. I Ie unloosed against me all his
hounds, while his journalists tired themselves in vain to
note down my contradictions in political matters. The
Socialists, mindful of my moral and physical strength,
covered me with their vengeance and their ostracism. At
least, they roamed at a distance. They were cautious and
far off* the trail of real things.
During one of the many evenings when. Milan was at
the mercy of these scoundrels, I found myself sur­
rounded and isolated in a cafe of the Piazza del Duomo,
the central hub of the Lombardian metropolis. While I
was sipping a drink, waiting for Michele Bianchi, a
hundred Socialists and loafers hemmed in the cafe and
began hurling abuses and insults at me. I had been rec­
ognized. Perhaps they intended, in their collective
wrath, to give me a beating in order to place on my per­
son the vengeance they had long since had in mind.
The crowd, growing in numbers, became more and more
menacing, and so the owner of the cafe and the female
cashier hastened to pull down the shutters. She invited
me, according to the fashion of those disorderly times,
to go out because I was endangering their interests. I
did not wait for a second invitation. I am used to facing

A Worn-Out Democracy 105
the rabble without fear. The more there are of them, the
more a man can move toward them with a sure courage
which, to some, may appear as an affectation. I cannot
say that there was any reluctance on my part to face
these cowards.
I looked at the leaders and said, “What do you want
of me? To strike me? Well, begin. Then be thereafter
on guard. For any insult of yours, any blow, you will
pay for dearly.”
I remember the picture of that wolf pack. They were
silent. They looked furtively at one another. The near­
est withdrew, and then suddenly fear, which is as con­
tagious as courage in any crowd of people, spread
among the group. They backed away; they dispersed
and only from a distance flung their last insults.
I recite this incident because it was typical of the
usual occurrence in the life of a Fascist. But it must be
remembered that in other cases the end was quite dif­
ferent—beatings, knife thrusts, bullets, assassinations,
atrocities, torture and death.
In these days there began to develop a contest be­
tween General Diaz, victor of our last campaign, and
Nitti.
The London pact, which had given Italy certain prom­
ises, broke down. The Adriatic coast-line was in a state
of complete insecurity. Absurd rumors spread in the
diplomatic clubs. The danger of seeing the Jugo-Slavinns <11 led along the whole Adriatic shore had caused
a bringing together in Rome of the cream of our un­
happy legions. Students, professors, workmen, citizens

106

My Autobiography

—representative men—were entreating the ministers
and the professional politicians. There was an appeal
from all the groups representative of the best Italian
life in behalf of Dalmatia. All these forces of righteous­
ness, on the occasion of the anniversary of Italy’s entry
into war, organized a Dalmatian parade, with the ob­
ject of dedicating, in the name of the fatherland, their
indestructible loyalty to their country.
Then, in the capital, came about an episode which is
still vivid in our memories. II raised general indigna­
tion. The Royal Guards, a new police corps, created
exclusively to serve the designs of Hie Nittian regime,
took the parade by storm. They fired gunshot volleys.
Many victims dropped and some fifty were wounded.
This was the most unworthy episode that ever hap­
pened under the sky of Rome within any memory. And
as if this assault and outrage were not sufficient, the
Dalmatians living in Rome were arrested, including the
women. Very few dared to raise their protests. Supine
victims and bullying authorities were the fashion. In the
chamber certain deputies, among whom were the na­
tionalist writer, Luigi Siciliani, and Egilberto Martire,
moved interpellations which found no echo. From the
columns of the Popolo d’ltalia I spread far and wide
my contempt. I hurled anathema against the system by
which a whole people were disgraced. My cry had some
echoes in the senate—in that senate where in historic
hours some great name always rose up to defend the
dignity, the right and the nobility of the Italian people.

A Worn-Out Democracy

107

A group of senators, at the head of whom was the
(leneralissimo Diaz, presented the following motion:
The senate regrets the methods of government which, by
tolerating a want of discipline destructive of the state’s
power, diminishes the glorious victory of our arms and the
admirable resistance of our people. It threatens any co-op­
erative work for the prosperity of the unified fatherland and
the peaceful attainment of every civil progress. These are
methods opposite to Italian tradition, and they have cul­
minated in the violent repression of a patriotic manifestation
on May twenty-fourth with the arbitrary arrest of Dalma­
tians and Fiumeans, guests of Rome.

Among the signatures, with the name of Diaz, were
to be seen the names of the Senator Attilio Hortis, a
celebrated historian, of Admiral Thaon de Revel, and
of many personalities of high Italian culture. The sign­
ers were sixty-four, among whom were the four vicepresidents of the senate.
The motion, in addition to its hint to awake Italian
tradition, had strength and vigor, and disdain for the
outrage done to the Italian war victory. The leader of
that disdain, before all others, was Armando Diaz. The
generalissimo bore about him the glory of Vittorio Veiioto. lie saw from day to day that his fine and lofty
idealism as soldier and chieftain xvas fading away.
The Nitti government—part and parcel of a decadent
p a r l y a r i d futile parliamentary system—the Nitti govemmenl, hearing the stamp of mere pandering for favor
and burned with the brand of politicians scrambling for

108

My Autobiography

power without regard for the nation and without brave
idealism—fell ingloriously for the third time.
Giolitti came back.
After so many humiliations and oscillations, parlia­
ment and the political system had revealed itself as an
assembly wholly unworthy to control or guide the des­
tinies of a people. At the third fall of Nitti, Giolitti, of
whom it may be said that he made the premiership a
profession, came back upon Ihe scene. His return gave
some of us the impression thal he was a kind of a re­
ceiver in bankruptcy for so-called self-government.
Justice requires our recognition of a great rectitude
in the private life of (■ iolilli; we cannot say so much for
his rectitude in his political character. He was a dis­
solves He never gave evidence of believing in the deep
idealistic springs and streams of I lalian life. As a crea­
ture of the bureaucracy, he trusted the whole Italian
problem to the vicissitudes of democratic and parlia­
mentary pretense and artificiality. Thus, owing to his
temperament, he held off during the war. Soon after the
victory he returned to the political scene like a man who
had to wind up a business. That business he was liqui­
dating had been certainly the most bloody and yet no
doubt the most magnificent and, in idealism, the most
successful in our history as a united people.
The disclosed purposes of the Giolitti ministry as to
domestic policy were good. After the most unhappy
Nittian mire, public opinion was induced to accept
new pilots without hostility. Foreign agents, provoking
elements, supported also by some domestic political

A Worn-Out Democracy

109

compromises, were inciting the Albanian population
against us. This noble land, which is but twelve hours
distant from Bari, and which had always absorbed an
influx of our civilization, this land in which some sparks
of modern civil life had gleamed only because of the in­
fluence we exercised there—all at once revolted against
our garrison. We had been at Valona with sanitary mis­
sions since 1908, and since 1914 we had had military
there. We had built there the city, the hospital, the mag­
nificent roads which were a refuge for the Serbian army,
routed in 1916. In Albania we had sacrificed millions
of lire and had devoted thousands of soldiers to main­
tain her in efficiency and to give the little state a future
and a well-ordered existence.
I knew and urged that it was useless to expect any
decided Albanian policy from Giolitti. The domestic
situation, which continued troubled, deprived him of
energy or mind to devote to foreign policy. At that
time the Honorable Sforza was Minister of Foreign
Affairs; that was quite enough to accomplish the last
vandalism in the Adriatic question. Meanwhile our mili­
tary garrison was obliged to quit Valona, owing to the
ineptitude of our government.
We entered another phase of defeatism.
In 1920 there was adopted among the railway em­
ployees the systematic practice of preventing the move­
m e n t of trains carrying soldiers, carabinieri or police­
m e n . Sometimes a similar policy extended also to the
clergy. Against this inconceivable abuse of power, I
alone protested. The Italian people were suffering pas­

110

My Autobiography

sively from a stupid conception of their opportunities
and from blindness which closed their eyes to their own
power and pride. Those who dared to resist and were
critical of the bureaucracy or of government policy were
persecuted by the government itself.
There was the incident of the station master of Cre­
mona, Signor Bergonzoni, which fell within my ob­
servation. He, by an energetic act, ordered the railway
men subject to his authority to hook onto a train a car
conveying some troops l<» Piacenza. For this episode,
exhibiting the most ordinary case of regularity in rou­
tine, the Railway Syndicate, dominated by Socialists,
demanded of the Ministry of Public Works the dis­
missal of the station master, Bergonzoni. And because
the ministry by its firmness rejected this demand of the
syndicate, Milan, which had nothing to do with all this
matter, had imposed upon it a railway strike lasting
thirteen days. Milan, a city of 900,000 inhabitants,
choked by an enormous traffic, found itself incommuni­
cado from its suburbs and the whole world. It was
thrown back on the use of stage coaches, autos, camions,
and was obliged to use even the small boats along the
Naviglio River.
Milan, our greatest modern city, was in the power of
political anarchy. Those same military forces who
would have been able easily to take the situation in
hand and dominate it were put at the mercy of the
local authorities. They were even obliged to ask the au­
thorities for the flour to make bread for the troops! The
stations, situated at the boundaries of the district of

A Worn-Out Democracy

ill

Milan, had in store heaps on heaps of goods; of course
these stores decayed or deteriorated and were at the
mercy of ware-house and freight-car robbers. At length,
after thirteen days, on the morning of June twentyfourth and after a meeting on behalf of the striking rail­
way employees during which there was a fusillade of
firearms, with dead and wounded, the railway men,
overpowered by the indignation which had spread
t hrough the whole body of citizens, were convinced that
it was better to return to work. But the state’s author­
ity was dead; it was now ready for the grave.
The Giolitti ministry muddled amid a quantity of
financial difficulties. Giolitti himself hoped to be able
to appease the Socialists with the project of general con­
fiscation of all war profits, and still more with a plan to
institute a strong tax on hereditary succession. This
latter measure, wholly socialistic, would have annihi­
lated the family conception of a patrimonial line. It
would have threatened the rights of an owner to be­
queath to his heirs his riches with his name. It had con­
sequences which were not only economic but also moral
and social. Capital as an institution is only in its in­
fancy; the right of disposal is necessary to foster the
functioning and development of this instrument of ambilion, of human welfare and of civilization.
lu international policy, Count Sforza, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, concluded the agreement of Spa,
signed Ihe protocol of Tirana with the renunciation of
Valona and Albania, signed the weak treaty of Sevres
with Turkey, and prepared by fits and starts to attempt

112

My Autobiography

an end also of the question of Fiume. This last hap­
pened at the conclusion of the treaty of Rapallo.
The application of the pact of London, by which Dal­
matia was assigned to Italy, seemed to have been twisted
without a single justifiable reason into something not to
be argued. And Senator Scialoia, a gentleman of the
old stamp, said amid the weak voices of the senate that
the London treaty “has continually been tricked out of
force and effect by those who arc themselves Italians.”
Relieving with all my being that it was necessary to
stop the flood of decadence in our foreign policy, I be­
gan to use our Fascisti organization and the Popolo
d’ltalia. I tried to raise some dikes. It was difficult to
hold back the dirty water. There was a tendency to go
toward communism whatever the cost. The power of
Lenin—I admit it—had assumed a quality of potency
only paralleled in mythology. The Russian dictator
dominated the masses. He enchanted the masses. He
charmed them as if they were hypnotized birdlings.
Only some time afterward did the news of the dreadful
Russian famine, as well as the information furnished by
our mission which had gone to Russia to study Bolshe­
vism, open the eyes of the crowd to the falsity of the
Russian paradise-mirage. Enthusiasm ebbed away little
by little. Finally Lenin remained only as a kind of ban­
ner and catchword for our political dabblers.
The aviation fields of Italy had been closed, the ma­
chines were being dismounted. There had been, how­
ever, some attempts to engage in civil aviation. One of
the most unhappy and dramatic episodes of that time
came out of the sky above Verona. Returning from a

A Worn-Out Democracy

113

trip to Venice, a big airplane fell upon the city. The
mishap caused the death of sixteen persons, including
the pilots. Among the dead there were several journal­
ists from Milan. The tragedy affected all Italy. Mourn­
ing was general. But to my horror the authorities seized
this opportunity to abandon discussion of aviation and
to dismantle the few machines, motors and wings which
were left.
It was just at that period that I wanted to take les­
sons to become a pilot. The machine which crashed in
Verona had been guided by a neighbor of my birth­
place, Lieutenant Ridolfi. His body was carried to the
churchyard of Forli. I had gone to Forli for a rest, with
some political friends. My reception in my own home
district had been cold and even hostile. My efforts to be
agreeable and my willingness to learn to fly just after
Ridolfi had lost his life seemed to be quite wasted. Any­
thing in those days that did not have a material value
seemed to be superfluous. Those were years when men’s
hearts were gray. For the same reason the state for
which Gabriele d’Annunzio was preparing a durable
I'orm in Fiume did not catch the imagination of man­
kind.
15 ut I did not give up. I repeated my flights. I flew
o v e r Mantua with the staff of the Popolo d’ltalia. I was
d e t e r m i n e d to show in action that aviation ought not to
disappear from our vision of Italian possibilities and
p r o g r e s s , to be won, if necessary, at the cost of hardsliip.s. I gave an example personally every time I had
the chance, and my friends did likewise.
The growing exaltation of the bewitched masses and

114

My Autobiography

the incredible weakness of the government culminated
at the beginning of September with the occupation of
the factories on the part of the metal workers. The oc­
cupation of the factories was to be an example of Bol­
shevism in action. The doctrine to be illustrated was
the taking possession of the means of production. The
workmen, with their childish understanding, and much
more the chiefs who were betraying them—and well
aware of their treachery as they did so—pretended that
they were able to adminisler directly, without an order
from any one planned beforehand, all the workshops,
all the processes, and even the sales of the output. In
truth, though it is not commonly realized, they did
nothing but make some side arms, such as daggers and
swords. They lost not less than twenty-one days in
forced leisure and childish manifestations of hatred and
impotence.
The occupation once begun, the managers, the own­
ers, and the employes of the establishments were se­
questered by the workmen. The trade-marks and factory
signs were taken away, while upon the roofs and the
doors of the factories the red banners with the sickle
and hammer, symbol of the soviets, were hoisted with
cheers. In every establishment a committee was formed
subject to a socialist-communist set of by-laws. Tele­
phones were used to threaten all who were keeping out
of the movement and who, like us of the Popolo d’ltalia,
were setting out to war against this grotesque sovietist
parody.
The seizure of the factories was accompanied by the

A Worn-Out Democracy

115

most, ferocious acts. At Turin, the old capital of Pied­
which had such glorious monarchical and military
traditions, the red court of justice worked with all its
might. Mario Sonzini, a nationalist and patriot, who
luul gone over to Fascism among the first, was arrested
by the workmen and given a cruel and grotesque revo­
lutionary trial. He was riddled by bullets and his body
was then thrown into a ditch. Somebody had a kind
Christian thought and threw him into the smelter ovens,
but, as these were extinguished and as cold as industry
itself, somebody else thought to put an end to the poor
martyr by beating and kicking out what remained of
life. Sonzini’s guilt was only that he was a Fascist. The
same fate befell others. To this kind of inhuman bru­
tality not even the women were strangers. Apparently
a bestial type of cruelty had taken hold of men and
women drunk with licentiousness.
The newspaper Avanti on that occasion reported this
barbarous murder as follows:
mont,

It may happen in life for one to be nationalist, to pass to
Fascism, to reflect the tendencies of order and to be, never­
theless, arrested and shot to death; this is an average stroke
of destiny.

The occupation of the factories in several Italian
I owns was merely an opportunity for violent demonsl rations. There were dead at Monfalcone, there were
d e a d in Milan and there were dead in other towns on the
peninsula.
Our credit abroad had been extinguished like a

116

My Autobiography

puffed-out candle. Even after the conclusion of peace,
there was little thought any longer devoted to a rehabili­
tation of our nation. One could feel a clear sensation
of collapse. The printing press began to spew out paper
money. It was necessary to increase circulation; it was
necessary to have recourse to inflation to prevent our
economic life from going into complete ruin. After ten
years, we are still feeling the burden of the conse­
quences of that inauspicious period.
The exigencies of such artificial finance hastened the
wreck. I denounced the peril in a series of articles in
a debate with Meda, a member of the chamber, a man
believed to be erudite in public finance. I can say now
that nobody in that murky time bad the ability to indi­
cate any clear course to the Italian people; in financial
matters we were going straight toward utter ruin—and
playing an accompaniment on the strings of his foreign
policy, Sforza was continuing his series of renunciations.
He arrived at Rapallo and from that moment Fiume
was doomed to become a detached, exiled city lying on
a bed of thorns.
On November fourth the celebration of the anniver­
sary of our victory gave opportunity for slight symp­
toms of reawakening. Rome and Milan both had exten­
sive patriotic demonstrations. All Italy celebrated. I
did.
But that was transitory. Almost at once affliction
came in those mournful incidents—the tragedy of the
Palace d’Accursio in Bologna, that of the Palace Estense in Ferrara, and the Bloody Christmas in Fiume.

A Worn-Out Democracy

117

In Bologna there was a bold handful of Fascists led
l>y Arpinati. We were aware that the Socialists were
preparing, in the red city and through the whole valley,
pompous demonstrations to celebrate the installation of
the new city government of Bologna, composed for the
most part of reds. On November twenty-first, quantities
of red banners were hoisted on the high towers of the
City Hall Palace as well as on the private buildings.
There had been planned also the release of flocks of
pigeons to bring the greetings of the Bologna Socialists
to their comrades of other places. The whole town was
in the hands of the Socialists. They were on the point of
adopting a constitution of the soviets. The city govern­
ment minority, composed of elements of good order,
with Fascists and combatants, was present at the meet­
ing. This was considered by the reds as a provocation
and a challenge.
The Fascist group of Bologna, which had its head­
quarters in a street called Marsala, organized several
squads to defend the public order at any price. In the
afternoon the Fascists were being singled out for con­
tinuous and increasing insults and provocations. The
Fascio—the organization of the Fascisti—by placards
made it plain that it was resolved not to be bull-dozed,
and it warned the women and children to keep at home
behind locked doors. It was foreseen that the streets of
lb>l<>giia might witness a tragedy. This firm attitude of
I lie Hulogna Fascists, guided by Arpinati, whipped up
the Socialists, not only because they felt themselves no
longer able to do as they pleased but also because physi­

118

My Autobiography

cal fear had taken possession of their leaders all up and
down the line. I say categorically that fear and cow­
ardice have always been typical characteristics of the
Socialist party in Italy.
At the moment when about thirty Fascists formed in
tiny squads and tried to go from Indipendenza Street,
the open space crowded with the Socialists, there came
a general scattering and a disordered shouting and
clamor. A portion of the ten died crowd poured over to
the City Ilall and entered the courtyard. The Socialists,
barricaded there as in a fortress, blinded by their own
base fears, supposed that all the fugitives were Fas­
cists; they feared that the City 11 a 11 might be invaded;
therefore they threw from above, upon the crowd, hand
bombs with which they had armed themselves.
This increased the general terror in the crowd. Many
of the people ran off, tearing up their tickets of the So­
cialistic organizations.
While these events were going on around the palace
and in the courtyard, in the Hall of the City Council
there exploded a sudden tragedy. 'I'lie red members of
the council, frightened by the apprehension of a Fas­
cist invasion, thronged for the most part toward the
exit. Some of them, however, preferred joining the pub­
lic, composed of red elements; some flung themselves
against the little group of the council conservatives. The
first shots were now heard in the hall. The guards, not
to be caught, threw themselves upon the ground. The
few minority councilors—among whom were the advo­
cate Giordani and advocates Oviglio, Biagi, Colliva,

A Worn-Out Democracy

119

M anaresi—firmly kept their places, offering a conspicu­
ous mark for wrath whipped up hy fear. Somebody
li red. The bullet missed Oviglio by a miracle. But a sec­
ond shot killed Lieutenant Giordani, a bcrsagliere,
mutilated in war, hated for his record by the reds.
Meanwhile, the organizers of the bloody riot were con­
tinuing to hurl bombs, as if they had gone out of their
minds, into the square crowded with people, and they
hit fugitive Socialists under the impression that their
victims were Fascists. Horrible was the carnage and the
butchery.
Something of the same kind happened a little later
at Ferrara on the occasion of a great Socialistic mani­
festation which was to have taken place in the historic
castle of the Estensi. A column of Fascists, advancing
to the spot of the meeting, met a fusillade of lead. The
Fascists left on the ground three dead and numbers of
wounded. Ferrara, the red, Ferrara, in which all mu­
nicipalities and the province were in the hands of the
Socialists; Ferrara, which had threatened to arrest its
own prefect—passed hours in anxiety. The same exas­
perated passion of Bologna seized the noble province
of the Estensi. I felt, however, that one could catch a
glimpse of tragedies which were mere preludes to eerlain revolution. What revolution?
I called to Milan the responsible chiefs of the Fascist
m o v e m e n t , the representatives of the Po Valley, of Up­
p e r 11 jily, of the towns and countrysides. Those present
w e r e n o t many, but they were men resolved to take any
r i s k . I made them understand, as I had suddenly un­

120

My Autobiography

derstood, that through newspaper propaganda, or by
example, we would never attain any great successes. It
was necessary to beat the violent adversary on the bat­
tle-field of violence.
As if a revelation had come to me, I realized that
Italy would be saved by one historic agency—in an im­
perfect world, sometimes inevitable still—righteous
force.
Our democracy of yesterdays had died; its testament
had been read; it had bequeathed us naught but chaos.

CHAPTER VII

THE GARDEN OF FASCISM

I

N certain contingencies violence has a deep moral
significance.

In our land a leading class was neither present
nor living. The Liberal party had abdicated everything
to the Socialists. There was no solid, modern, national
unity.
Ignorance was still astride the workmen and peas­
ant masses. It was useless to attempt to blaze a trail by
tine words, by sermons from chairs. It was necessary to
give timely, genial recognition to chivalrous violence.
The only straight road was to beat the violent forces of
evil on the very ground they had chosen.
With us were elements who knew what war meant.
From them was born the organization of Italian Bun­
dles of Fight. Many also volunteered from our universi­
ties. They were students, touched by the inspiration of
idealism, who left their studies to run to our call.
We knew that we must win this war too—throw into
yesterday the period of cowardice and treachery. It was
necessary to make our way by violence, by sacrifice, by
blood; it was necessary to establish the order and dis­
c i p l i n e wanted by the masses, but impossible to obtain
I hem through milk-and-water propaganda and through
121

122

My Autobiography

words, words and more words—parliamentary and
journalistic sham battles.
We began our period of rescue and resurrection.
Dead there were, but on the horizon all eyes saw the
dawn of Italian rebirth.
The unhappy year of 1921 was closed with the tragic
dissolution of the Fiume drama. After the Treaty of
Rapallo, by which Finnic was doomed to be a separate
body, the Italian resistance in Fiume made itself more
decided than ever. D'Annunzio declared that, whatever
the cost, he would not abandon the city which had suf­
fered so long and painfully to keep alive and keep pure
its Italian soul.
I, too, had been living this drama, day by day. D’An­
nunzio and I had been close together since the first days
of the campaign. Now for more than a year I had been
accustomed to receive his brotherly letters. They
brought to me the breath of the passion of Fiume. Since
the first moment of the occupation of the holocaust city
the poet had disclosed to me his firm will to fight. Sig­
nificant evidence is found in a letter which D’Annunzio
had sent me on September 14, 1919, transmitting to me,
for my newspaper, one of his most virile messages. He
wrote:
My dear Mussolini: Here are two lines in a hurry. I have
been working for hours. My hand and my eyes are aching. I
send my son, Gabriellino, brave companion, to bring you this
manuscript. Look out for any needed correction, and thank
you. This is only the first act of a struggle that I will see to
the end after my own style. In the event that the censorship
should be bold enough to interfere, please publish the letter

The Garden of Fascism

123

with the white intervals showing where words are omitted.
Then we will see what we shall see.
I will write you again. I will come. I admire your constancy and the strength of your well-directed blows. Let me
clasp your hand.
Yours,
Gabriele d’Annunzio.

From July to December the situation in Fiume grew
more and more difficult. In the face of the determined
attitude of D’Annunzio, Giolitti—to be faithful to the
engagements assumed at Rapallo by Count Sforza—re­
solved to blockade the city. The results of the blockade
were dubious; therefore the government made up its
mind to occupy the city by a military expedition. They
chose Christmas, because there were two holidays during
which newspapers did not appear. Italian soldiers were
being hurled against an Italian city, against a handful
of audacious legionaries, ardent-souled Italians, the
combatants of D’Annunzio’s brothers. Blood was on the
streets. There were even dead. All Italy was saturated
with deep indignation.
Thereafter a sense of remorse and conciliation took
the upper hand. A formula was found. D’Annunzio
gave up his authority to a committee of citizens and left
Fiume. It had been held by him during sixteen months
with invincible faithfulness. Now it was requisite to
intrust its destinies to its best citizens and to the events
which were maturing, inexorably. I wrote at that time
a message which found an echo in all Italian hearts:
Beneath all the verbosity and the shuttle of mere words,
the druma is perfect; horrible, if you choose, but perfect. On

124

My Autobiography

one side is the cold Reason of State determined to the very
bottom, on the other the warm Reason of the Ideal ready to
make desperate, supreme sacrifices. Invited to make our
choice, we, the uneasy and precocious minority, choose
calmly the Reason of the Ideal.

A few days later, on January 4, 1921, I commem­
orated the dead of the Legion of Ronchi by one of the
most fervid articles I ever wrote. It ended with the fol­
lowing words:
They are the latest to fall in the Great War, and it is not
in vain! The Italian tricolored banner hails them, Italian
earth covers them. Their graves are a shrine. There all fac­
tions and divisions are obliterated. The dead of Carnaro bear
witness that Fiume and Italy are one, the same flesh, the
same soul. The opaque ink of the diplomats will never undo
what has been sealed by blood forever.

Hail then to the Ronchi Legion, to the Duce—the leader,
D’Annunzio—to his living who return and to his dead who
never will.
They have remained to garrison the snowy mountains—
Nevosso!

The iron necessity of violence already had been con­
firmed. Every one of us felt it. Now came the moment
to move to action with a clear sense of the definite issue.
The formation of squads and battling units which I had
drawn up by intuition had been accomplished. I had
given them, in precise directions, well-specified tasks
within clean limits. They began their work of discipline
and retaliation.
Our violence had to possess impetuosity. It had been
trained to be loyal, as were the legions of Garibaldi, and

The Garden of Fascism

125

above all chivalrous. The Central Committee of the Ital­
ian Bundles of Fight co-ordinated, under my direction,
the whole work of the local executives and of the action
squads, not only in the provinces but even in the towns.
Valiant and vigorous elements joined us from the uni­
versities. Italian schools are enriched by the glorious
names of students who quitted their halls for political
life and Fascism. These eager boys left, without regret
and without wavering, a merry existence to face mortal
dangers during punitive actions against betrayers of
our country. Later on, to these heroes of bold youth I
ordered the awarding of degrees ad honorem; they had
given their blood freely so that their nation might be
saved. Among them was the best type of Italian young
manhood, who by disciplined methodical action, full of
impetus, as were the actors, met and destroyed the so­
cial-communist spiders which in the web of foolishness
and ignorance were exterminating every life germ of
the Italian people. Wherever there popped up a vexa­
tion, a ransom, a case of blackmail, an extortion, a dis­
order, a reprisal—there would gather the Fascist squads
of action. The black shirt—symbol of hardihood—was
our uniform of war.
The Liberal-Democratic government quite naturally
put difficulties in the way of the Fascist movement. It
relied principally on the royal guards—Guardia Regia
—blind instrument of anti-national hatred. But we, who
had sane courage, resource and ability, accepted the fact
of facing ambush, traps and death. When instead we
were taken to prison, we remained there long periods

126

My Autobiography

waiting for trial. I had an effect on my soldiers which
seemed to me almost mystical. The boys saw in me the
avenger of our wronged Italy. The dying said, “Give
us our black shirts for winding sheets.” I could not re­
main unmoved when I knew that their last thoughts
were of “Our native land and the lJuce.” Love and
songs bloomed. A revival of youth, filled with Italian
boldness, swamped by ils virile male beauty the unre­
strained rages of Ihe incsponsiblcs, painted out the fear
of the Socialists, obliterated the ambiguity of the Lib­
erals. The poesy of battle, Ihe voices of an awakening
race were multiplying, in those years of revival, the ener­
gies of our nation.
Our dead were innumerable. Italy’s imps, the red
dabblers, our organization of so-called Freemasons who
were steeped in political intrigue, already were seeing
the danger, menacing to them, of the coming of Fascism.
Therefore they used every means to put us down; they
created their snares and ambushes more and more care­
fully and built their pitfalls more and more cunningly.
Every day both the public streets and the open rural
fields of Italy were smeared with the blood of frightful
conflicts. Sundays, holidays and any occasions for gath­
erings seemed particularly marked out for attack.
I restrained our own violence to the strict limit of ne­
cessity. I enforced that view-point with lieutenants and
with the rank and file. At times they obeyed me with re­
gret and pain. They were thinking of companions
treacherously murdered. But they always submitted to
my orders against reprisals. They accepted my author­

The Garden of Fascism

127

ity voluntarily and completely. If I had had a mind to
do so, I could have ordered a pitched battle. The boys
would have leaped at the chance; they were looking to
me as to a chief whose word was law.
There were evidences of such a deep attachment to
me that I felt lifted up and refined by it. It created in
me a deep sense of responsibility. Among the episodes I
remember the death of a young man, twenty years old,
the Count Nicolo’ Foscari, treacherously stabbed to
death by a communist dagger. This fine boy died after
two days of agony. In the agony of the wound and at
the point of death, he wanted to have always near him
my photograph. He declared himself glad and proud to
die and through me he knew how to die.
I was calloused to political battles. My inclination,
however, has always been against all but chivalrous bat­
tles. I understood the sadness of civil strife; but in des­
perate political crises, when the bow happens to be too
much bent, the arrow either flies off or the cord breaks.
In a few months of action and violence we had to win
no less than fifty years lost in empty parliamentary skir­
mishes, lost in the marshes of little political intrigues,
lost in the wretchedness of an atmosphere defiled by
selfish interest and petty personal ambition, lost in the
maze of attempts to treat government as if it were a
jam pot to attract the flies.
In 1921 I tried a political agreement and truce with
our adversaries under the protection of the government.
The utter incomprehension of the Socialists and Lib­
erals was enormous. My gesture, prodigal and generous,

128

My Autobiography

created solely by me, served only to raise new fogs,
miasmas and equivocations. The truce had been signed
by the Socialists but not by the communists. The latter
continued the open struggle, helped in every way by the
Socialists themselves. A generous experiment in pacifi­
cism had been quite useless. Socialism had corrupted
Italian life. There would he always some irreconcilable
antagonists, and so the .struggle, after a short paren­
thesis, was taken up again. 11 lasted until the final out­
come, but its renewal was Ihe beginning of the great
political battle of 1921.
I will not set forth all Ihe deadly frays of this year.
They have gone into the past. But in the houses of my
men are burning perennially the votive lamps of the
survivors and on their hearths is the living memory of
the fallen. The Fascist legions are of every age and of
every condition. Many died when the victory was as yet
uncertain, but the God of just men will guide all the
fallen to eternal light and will reward the soul who lived
nobly and who wrote in blood the goodness and ardor
of his faith.
The first months of 1921 were characterized by an
extreme violence in the Po Valley. The Socialists came
to the point where they were even willing to shoot at the
funeral processions of the Fascists. It happened even in
Rome. It was at that time that in Leghorn there was
held the congress of the Socialist party. A schism broke
out. On that occasion the autonomous Communist party
was created, which afterward in all the manifestations
of Italian political life played such a loathsome part.

The Garden of Fascism

129

I knew—and it was evident to every one in spite of
concealment—that the new Communist party was in­
spired and supported and even directed from Moscow.
We were invaded just as other lands have since been
invaded.
At Triest, a city dear to every Italian, which had al­
ways kept alive the flame of faith and enthusiasm, a
great Fascist meeting was held. At the head of the
Triest Fascists was Giunta, a member of the Italian
Chamber and an ardent and valiant Fascist from the
first call to action. He knew, in various circumstances,
how to raise formidable barriers against this Slavic in­
road and against the stupidity of the men who had taken
authority in Triest. The gathering was held at the Ros­
setti Theatre. There I spoke. I set forth our funda­
mental principles, not only for the Fascists but for all
those who were interested in a new and complete Ital­
ian policy. After a panoramic examination of the knotty
problems which at that time were vexing Italian for­
eign policy, I demanded a complete, definite withdrawal
of the Rapallo Treaty by which Sforza and Giolitti had
signed away Fiume. I acknowledged, none the less, the
impossibility of setting oneself, at that moment, against
the tragic consequences of the treaty—the fruit of a long
disintegration fostered by those who had led us into a
morass.
“The fault of the renunciation,” I affirmed, “is not to
he attributed entirely to the negotiators at the last hour;
the renunciation had been perpetrated already in par­
liament, in our journalism, even in a university where

130

My Autobiography

a professor has published books—translated, of course,
at Zagabria—in order to demonstrate according to his
style of thinking that Dalmatia is not Italian!
“The Dalmatian tragedy lies in this ignorance, this
bad faith and utter incomprehension. We hope to put a
stop to these grotesque errors by our future work. We
will know, love and defend Italian Dalmatia.
“The treaty signed, il was possible to make it void
by one of the following means: Father a foreign war or
by insurrection al home. Moth are absurd! It is impos­
sible to excite the man in the street against a treaty of
peace after live years of bloody calvary. Nobody is able
to perform a miracle!
“It was possible to awake in Italy a revolution in
favor of the intervention, but in November, 1921, it was
not possible to think of a revolution in order to annul a
peace treaty which, good or bad, has been accepted by
ninety out of every hundred of Italians.”
Having delineated clearly the uncertain and tran­
sitory position in which Italy found herself at that time
in respect to the Fiume tragedy and herself, having
shown the impossibility of creating a revolution which
would have been premature and condemned to failure,
I laid down and fixed by firm, precise tacks and nails
what was to be the political programme of the Fascists
in 1921.
“From these general premises,” I said, “it follows that
the Italian Bundles of Fight should ask:
“First, that the treaties of peace be re-examined and
modified in parts which are revealed as inapplicable or

The Garden of Fascism

131

the application of which can be a source of hatred and
incentive to new wars;
“Second, the economic annexation of Fiume to Italy
and the guardianship of Italians living in Dalmatian
countries;
“Third, the gradual disengagement of Italy from the
group of the Occidental plutocratic nations by the de­
velopment of our productive forces at home;
“Fourth, an approach once again toward the nations
of Austria, Germany, Bulgaria, Turkey, Hungary, but
with dignified attitude, and safeguarding the supreme
necessities of our north and south boundaries;
“Fifth, the creation and intensification of friendly re­
lations with all peoples of the Near and Far East, not
excluding those which are ruled by the soviets.
“Sixth, the recognition in colonial policy of the rights
and necessities of our nation;
“Seventh, the reform and renewal of all our diplo­
matic representatives abroad by elements with special
university training;
“Eighth, the building up of Italian colonies in the
Mediterranean sea as well as those beyond the AtlanI ic by economic and cultural institutions and rapid com­
munications.”
I concluded my speech by an ardent affirmation of
faith.
“It is destiny,” I said, “that Rome again takes her
place as the city that will be the director of the civiliza­
tion of all Western Europe. Let us commit the flame of
Ibis passion to the coming generations; let us make of

132

My Autobiography

Italy one of the nations without which it is impossible
to conceive the future history of humanity.”
The year 1921 was the centenary of Dante. I was
dreaming, in the name of Alighieri: “The Italy of to­
morrow, both free and rich, all-resounding, with seas
and skies peopled with her fleets, with the earth every­
where made fruitful by her plows.”
Later on, in a meeting of Lombardian Fascists, I in­
dicated some landmarks of Ihe Fascist battle. In a
speech that I made lo my friends in Milan I affirmed
that by its fatiguing work Fascism was preparing men
of a spirit suited lo Ihe task of an imminent to-morrow
—that of ruling the nation.
Already in germination through all these affirmations,
there was growing the definite intention of preparing by
legal action, as well as by violence, for the conquest of
power.
The Socialists and Communists, though debating be­
tween themselves on doctrinarian questions, vied with
one another to show themselves more anti-Fascist than
the others. The Communists had no scruples. Every day
they gave proof of their contempt for law, and they evi­
denced a foolish disregard for the strength of their ad­
versaries.
At Florence, during a parade of patriotic character,
there had been an attempt at a communist insurrection.
Bombs were thrown, isolated Fascists were pursued. It
happened on this occasion that a very young Fascist
named Berta was horribly murdered. The unhappy boy,
surprised upon a bridge of the Arno River, was beaten
to a bloody pulp and thrown from the parapet into the

The Garden of Fascism

133

water. As the poor victim, by a dull instinct of selfpreservation, clung to the railing bars with his fingers,
I lie Communists rushed upon him and beat his hands un­
til our martyr, whose jellied hands were slackening their
grip, finally let go and was plunged into the Arno. Ilis
body was whirled about in the current.
This single episode of incredible ferocity gave evi­
dence of how deeply Communist outrage had pene­
trated into Italy. As if that were not enough, soon
afterward there occurred the butchery of Empoli, where
two camions were loaded with marines and carabineers.
The proof of the degenerative ferocity of the Com­
munists was provided by the corpses of the poor vic­
tims, for their inert bodies were treated as jungle sav­
ages treat the corpses of their victims.
This was not confined to any one province. At that
time there happened also the trap and massacre of Casale Monferrato, where among the dead were two old
Sardinian drummers and where Cesare Maria de Vecchi,
a brave companion, was wounded. At Milan isolated
Fascists were singled out and attacked by stealth. One
of our most beloved friends, the very young Aldo
Sette, was murdered with all the accompaniment of
savagery.
But on the twenty-third of March occurred the cul­
minating episode of premeditated horror, with dread­
ful consequences. The Communists caused a bomb to ex­
plode in the Diana Theatre in that city. It was crowded
with peaceful citizens attending an operatic perform­
ance. The bomb sent twenty persons to sudden death.
Fifty others were mutilated. All Milan gave itself up

134

My Autobiography

to anguish and anger and to chills of vengeance. There
was no possibility of checking public sentiment. Squads
of Fascists assaulted for the second time the newspaper
Avanti and it was burned by them. Others tried also to
assault the Workers’ Chamber, but a strong military
garrison barred the Fascists from an attack.
The action squads turned their activity into the sub­
urbs, firmly held both by Communists and Socialists.
The swift, decisive act ion of the Fascists served to drive
from their nests and pul. lo flight Ihe subverters of civil
order. The political authority was powerless; it could
not control the disorders and disturbances. On the twen­
ty-sixth of March I concentrated all the Fascists of
Lombardy. They filed off. marching compactly in col­
umns, through the principal streets of Milan. It was a
demonstration of strength not to he forgotten. At last
over the horizon I had brought defenders of civil life,
protectors of order and citizenship. There had come a
spirit of revival for all good works. The martyrs of the
Diana and the Fascist victims were the best inspiration.
A whole people might now be united in the name of the
Roman Littorio, under the direction of Italian youth—
a youth which had won the war and now would again
attain the serene peace of the spirit and the rewards of
fruitful virtue, of discipline, work and fraternity.
Unforgettable were the demonstrations for the victims
of the dastardly bomb at the Diana. It was from that
day on that there began the progressive crashing down
and crumbling of the whole structure of Italian sub­
versive elements. Now they were driven like rats to their

The Garden of Fascism

135

holes and were barricaded in the few forts of the Work­
ers’ Chambers and of the district clubs.
I led a life of intense activity. I managed the Popolo
d’ltalia and every morning I was able to give the po­
litical text for the day, not only to Milan but to the
principal cities of Italy in which the political life of the
nation found its sources. I led the Fascist party with a
firm hand. I must say that I gave some very strict or­
ders. I had an ear open to all who came to Milan with
communications about our organization in the various
provinces. I watched the activity of our enemies. I
guarded for the Fascists the clear, clean stream of pur­
pose. I maintained the freedom necessary for our elas­
ticity of movements. I wished not to mix or adulterate
such a pure and strong faith as the Fascist faith. I
wished not to blend that ardent youth which was the
essential soul of Fascism with old elements of trade and
barter, combinations, coalitions, parliamentary com­
promises and the hypocrisies of Italian liberalism.
Among the many vicissitudes which have accom­
panied my existence I have always kept an invincible
passion for flying. At that period, so tumultuous, so
colored by dramatic hues, every morning found me on a
bicycle going and coming some eighteen miles to take
lessons in aviation. My teacher was Giuseppe Radaelli,
a modest and brave aviator, full of passion for flight
and happy to have a chance to teach me the difficult
craft of being a good pilot.
One morning I took a seat in a plane with Radaelli.
The first flight came off without incident. During the

136

My Autobiography

second flight, on the contrary, the motor for some rea­
son stalled, just at the moment when we were executing
the maneuver of coming down. The machine veered
sidewise and after gliding on one wing, precipitated
us onto the field from a height of about forty metres.
The pilot came off with some light wounds on the fore­
head. I had several about the head which would require
two weeks to heal. After an emergency treatment at
the field I was treated more thoroughly by Dr. Leo­
nardo Pallieri at the (luardia Mcdica of Porta Venezia.
That incident, which might have had marked conse­
quences to my life, was, thanks to the kind treatment
by my personal friend. Dr. Ambrogio Hinda, passed off
as nothing.
This incident, however, gave me the opportunity to
measure how many Italians were following my affairs.
I got almost a plebiscite of warm sympathy from all
over the land. I rested, suffering, for some days, and
then I took up my usual activity at the Popolo d’ltalia,
knowing that Italy no longer disregarded the part I
was to play.
On the day of the carnage at the Diana and of the
consequent reprisals, while spirits were kindled and irri­
tated, a certain Masi, sent by the anarchists of Piombino, came to Milan to attempt my life. He presented
himself at my house, rang the bell and boldly climbed
the stairs. He was a strange creature of extraordinary
mien. My daughter Edda went to open the door.
The unknown man asked for me. He was sent to the
Popolo d’ltalia, but went below and waited for me on

The Garden of Fascism

137

he large public square of Foro Bonaparte. When he
saw me he came toward me at first rapidly, and then
slowly he wavered. He asked me in a halting voice if I
was Professor Mussolini, and when I said I was he
added that he wanted to speak to me at some length.
The strange behavior of the individual with the grim
eye made me understand that I found myself in the pres­
ence of a madman. I said that I did not give audience in
the street; I told him that I received at the Popolo
d’ltalia, where in fact he came half an hour later, ask­
ing to be introduced to me. I consented at once and will­
ingly. Masi—who, I repeat, was a young man with burn­
ing eyes—as soon as he came into my presence appeared
embarrassed. He said he wanted to speak to me. His
behavior was so curious that I asked him to tell me
promptly and sympathetically what he wanted to say.
After a moment of hesitation he told me that he had
been chosen by lot, in a drawing by the anarchists of
I Viombino, to murder me treacherously with a Berretta
pistol. Later, having been caught in some doubts, he had
resolved to come and confess everything to me, to hand
me the weapon with which he had intended to kill me
and to put himself at my mercy. I listened to him, but
I said not a word.
Taking the revolver from his hands, I called the chief
clerk and telephone operator of the newspaper, Sant’
Klia, and intrusted to him that unhappy man, so en­
snared by anarchy and frightened by the consequences
of his dreams. I wanted Sant’ Elia to accompany him
lo Triest, with a letter of introduction to the Fascist
I

138

My Autobiography

Giunta. Soon afterward, however, the police—informed
by what means I know not of the episode—arrested the
anarchist of Piombino as he went away. This was the
one clever piece of detective work performed at that
time by the Milan police. They had utterly failed to
trace out the dynamiters of the Diana even two months
after the crime.
Oh, many had meditated upon my funeral! And yet
love is stronger than hatred. I always felt a power over
events and over men.
Giolitti in those days was in a most difficult parlia­
mentary situation. On the political horizon there had ap­
peared a political constellation of first magnitude—it
was Fascism. Facing this fact, the president of the
council of that epoch deemed it opportune to measure
the parties on the basis of parliamentary suffrage, and
he announced the elections for the month of May.
After a preliminary discussion the various parties
which were pledged to order, in opposition to Socialist
communism, found it expedient to go into the elections
as a body, which could be defined as a national bloc.
In the centre of the bloc—the only motivating and
encouraging force—was Fascism. All other parties kept
their complexions as subverters in political and eco­
nomic matters. The Socialist party presented itself
separated from the Communist party, while the Popu­
lar party, which always claimed an inspiration of eccle­
siastical, religious character, moved on the field alone,
leaning heavily upon the political influence of the coun­
try vicars.

The Garden of Fascism

139

In order to make myself acquainted with the real
efficiency of our party, I started reconnoitering in sev­
eral provinces. I received an enthusiastic welcome at the
beginning of April in Bologna, a fortress of socialism
and a barometer indicating the level of the whole Po
Valley. Bologna greeted me in a jubilation of colors,
with parades, fanfares of welcome and speeches favor­
ing Italian resurrection. The butchery of the Palace of
Accursio was still too fresh and red in memory. Fas­
cism was in a hot fervor; therefore my presence could
not fail to whip up in all the young men a singular
strength of will, hope and faith.
From Bologna I went to Ferrara, another stronghold
of socialism. And there again there was waiting for me
an unforgettable demonstration of strength. Bologna
and Ferrara are two magnificent towns, centres of
regions exclusively agricultural. In those days I could
measure by my youth and intimate knowledge the
strength, the mentality, the ways of thinking and the
longing for order of the workers of the land. I under­
stood that their thinking had lost its way, but it was
not dominated by red propaganda. At bottom their
mentality is that of people wise and praiseworthy, who
have always been, at the crucial moments, the bulwark
of the fortunes of the Italian race.
The electoral struggle lasted exactly a month. Dur­
ing that period I made but three speeches—one in Bo­
logna, once in Ferrara and one in Milan, on the Place
Borromeo. Contrary to what happened during the po­
litical elections of 1919, I succeeded this time in getting

140

My Autobiography

a plurality not only in Milan but also in the districts
of Bologna and Ferrara. Great demonstrations of joy
followed the news. Furthermore, all Fascism in the elec­
toral field was gaining in undoubted strides.
In November, 1919, I had not succeeded in getting
more than 4,000 votes. In 1921 I was at the head of the
list with 178,000 votes. My election to the Italian Cham­
ber caused a grea t rejoicing among my friends, my col­
leagues, my assistants. To all my faithful sub-editors,
Giuliani, Gaini, Itoeea, Morgagni and others, I recalled
the episode of 1919, when I said lo my discouraged and
perplexed assistants tlial williin Ihe space of two years
I would have my revenge. The prophecy had proved
true within two years. A new moral atmosphere was
being breathed by every stratum of our population.
Though not many Fascists entered the parliament, the
few represented in themselves a tremendous force for
the new destinies of Italy.
At Montecitorio, the House of Parliament, in order
to follow the rules of the chamber, the Fascists formed
their own group. There were only thirty-five representa­
tives. It was numerically a small group, indeed, but it
was composed of men with good livers and excellent
courage.
During the session I made few speeches. I think I
spoke five times and that was all. Certainly I tried in all
cases to give my oratory a spirit and to make it stick to
realities. Certainly I confined it to a devotion to the in­
terests of Italian life. I put aside parliamentary triflings
and the tin sword play of parliamentary politicians.

The Garden of Fascism

141

In a speech made on the twenty-first of June, 1921,
I criticised without reserve the foreign policy of the
Giolitti ministry. I put on a firm, realistic basis the ques­
tion of Northern Italy, the Upper Adige. I pointed out
the feebleness of the government and of the men placed
in authority over the new provinces. One of these, Credaro, was “bound also by means of the symbol of the
political compass and triangle to the immortal precepts”
of false liberalism—to wit, he was swayed by that Ma­
sonry which in Italy was representing a “web of for­
eign and internationalistic ideas.” Therefore, I affirmed
solemnly: “As the government of Giolitti is responsible
for the miserable Salata and Credaro policy in the Up­
per Adige, I vote against him. Let us declare to the
German deputies here in our present Italian parliament
that we find ourselves at the Brenner Pass now, and
that at the Brenner we will remain at any price.” I took
up again the hot, impassioned subject of Fiume and Dal­
matia. I assaulted violently the shameful foreign pol­
icy of Sforza, leading our land to humiliation and ruin.
I spoke of our domestic policy. I stripped the cov­
ering from the Socialists and Communists and made
them face Fascism. I pointed out with irony the fact
that, among others, with the Communists stood Graziadei, who, at other times, had been my opponent when
he was a Socialist reformer. I exposed to the light the
utter lack of principles to be found in representatives
who dipped their paws into this or that party group or
programme solely for the purpose of gaining petty
power or personal gain.

142

My Autobiography

The speech, which had only the purpose of clarifica­
tion, gave some needed hints as to our political action as
Fascists in destruction of the methods and principles of
our adversaries. To my surprise it created a deep im­
pression. It had a vast echo outside the chamber and
was undoubtedly among the factors which finally
doomed the Giolitti ministry, like all the rest, to topple
over like a drunken buzzard.
I was not alone in the parliamentary struggle. The
group was helping me valiantly and with ability. Al­
ready the Deputy Fedrrzoni, s i n c e then a distinguished
official of the Fascist state, had started a review and re­
vision of the whole work of Count Sforza, Giolitti’s
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and particularly of the
Adriatic policy. There had been dramatic sessions in
which the work of the aforesaid minister not only was
put under a strict and inexorable examination, accord­
ing to both the logic and conscience of Fascism, but
was examined in the light of the negotiations and
treaties, open or secret, which the parliament had to
know and approve.
After various parliamentary ups and downs, the Giohtti ministry fell and was followed by that of Bonomi
—a Socialist who arrived at being a Democrat through
varied captious reasonings. lie tried to set up a policy
of internal pacification. He was interested in the truce
between Fascists and Socialists, of which I have already
told the meagre results. Just at the moment when Bo­
nomi was developing this political fabric came the
tragic episode of the massacre of Sarzana. There not
less than eighteen Fascists fell. Then came the butchery

The Garden of Fascism

143

of Modena, where the Royal Guards shot into a parade
of Fascists, leaving some ten dead and many wounded.
The home policy had not found as yet, one could mildly
say, any perch of stability. I constantly was unfolding
my active task as leader of the party, as journalist and
politician.
I had a duel of some consequence with Ciccotti Scozzese, a mean figure of a journalist. He was the long
hand of our Italian political Masonry. Among other va­
rious imperfections, one might say he had that of phys­
ical cowardice. Our duel was proof of it. After several
assaults the physicians were obliged to stop the encoun­
ter because of the claim that my opponent had a heart
attack. In other words, fear had set him all aflutter.
Shortly before that duel I had another with Major
Baseggio over some parliamentary squabble.
I think I have some good qualities as a swordsman—
at least I possess some qualities of courage, and thanks
to both, I always have come out of combat rather well.
In those combats having a chivalrous character, I en­
deavor to acquit myself in a worthy manner.
Finally in November, 1921, I convoked in Rome a
large congress of the Fascists of the whole of Italy. The
moment had arrived to emerge from the first phase, in
which Fascism had had the character of a movement
outside the usual political divisions, into a new phase,
in which the organic structure of a party, which had
been made strong both by firm political intrenchment
and by the growth of central and local organization,
should be crystallized.

144

My Autobiography

The Italian Bundles of Fight had been inspired by an
impetuous spirit. They possessed therefore an organiza­
tion of battle rather than a true and proper organization
of party. It was now necessary to come to this second
phase in order to be prepared lo be a successor of the
old parties in the command and direction of public af­
fairs. The congress at the Augusleo—the tomb of Au­
gustus and now a concert hall in Home—had to agree on
the terms for the creation of Ihe new party. It had to
fix both the organization and Ihe programme.
That was a memorable meeting. Thanks to the num­
ber of the followers and the quickness and solidity of
the discussions, it showed the virility of Fascism. My
point of view won an overwhelming victory in that meet­
ing. The Italian Bundles of Fight were now transform­
ing themselves. They were to receive the new denomi­
nation of Fascist National party, with a central direc­
tory and supreme council over the provincial organiza­
tions and the lesser Fascist sections which were to be
created in every locality. On that occasion I wanted
with all my desire to strip from our party the personal
character which the Fascist movement had assumed be­
cause of the stamp of my will. But the more I wished to
give the party an autonomous organization and the more
I tried, the more I received the conviction from the evi­
dence of the facts that the party could not have existed
and lived and could not be triumphant except under my
command, my guidance, my support and my spurs.
The meeting in Rome gave a deep insight into the
fundamental strength of Fascism, but especially for me

The Garden of Fascism

145

it was a revelation of my personal strength. But there
were several unpleasant incidents. There had been some
men killed in Rome. The workers’ quarter of Rome was
hostile to us. The work of the congress had, however, its
full and normal development, and the parade of Fas­
cists at last filed off in battle array through the streets of
Rome. It served notice to everybody that Fascism was
ripe as a party, and as an instrumentality with the heart
and the means to battle and to defend itself.
The Bonomi ministry developed its pacification pol­
icy in the midst of difficulties of all kinds. The time and
the moment were rather murky. The year 1921 pre­
sented difficulties which would have made any politician
shiver. On the horizon a line of clarification was to be
discerned, but the sky was nevertheless still heavy with
old clouds.
About the end of this formless, gray year, awaiting
a great dawn, occurred an event in the financial world
which threw a shadow of sorrow over the whole land.
This was the crash of the Banca Italiana di Sconto.
The collapse was felt particularly in the southern part
of Italy by the humble classes who had deposited their
savings in that bank. This great banking institution had
been born during the war and had done notable service
for the organization of our efficiency, but in the post­
war period it could not bear the burden of its engage­
ments. The big banking organization, in which the
laboring populations of the South and of Upper Italy
were interested so deeply, crumbled on itself, giving all
the postwar Italian financial policy a sensation of dis­

146

My Autobiography

may and failure. Ignorance, foolishness, fault, levity?
Who knows?
Certainly our credit as a power and as a rebuilding
force in comparison with foreign countries diminished
enormously. To the faults of our domestic policy was
added now, in the eyes of the world, a plutocratic and
financial insufficiency.
From the broils of financial eliaos and in the maze of
debates which ensued. Fascism kept itself aloof. It de­
layed not to consider the past, but chose to determine
carefully a sound, wise and foreseeing monetary policy
for the nation.
For the first time I found myself squarely challenged
by the gigantic problem of public finance.
For me it was a new airplane and there was no com­
petent instructor anywhere on our field.

CHAPTER VIII

TOWARD CONQUEST OF POWER

INANCE, the proper use and easy flow of cap­
ital, and the development of the banking struc­
ture of a nation must not be underestimated
when one has to face the clear responsibility of building
a state or of leading a people out of chaos.
The noisy crash of the great Banca Italiana di Sconto
in Italy revealed, as I have said, a deep weakness in
our economic structure. After the war it was clear that
many banking and industrial enterprises were out of
adjustment and must disappear or be succeeded by
stronger institutions.
There were struggles between opposing groups of
capitalists. These created a cynical attitude among the
modern middle class; at the same time it was shown that
our capitalistic industrial group resented the vice of
having no comprehensive plan. We needed a strong cap­
italistic tradition, rigorous experience; we found that in
the whir of events it was difficult to perceive who was
right and who would probably be able to save himself,
when the pressure came and a test of strength was made.
The other nations, who saw deeply into this strange
cauldron through the cold eyes of their financiers, made
dark prophecies as to our economic life. The Italian

F

147

148

My Autobiography

government itself did not know how to behave in its
money affairs, and, not finding anything better, did as
is often done in such circumstances—began to print
money. That contributed to render a situation which
was already bad and complicated, grotesquely worse.
In January, 1922, the Inter-Allied Conference was
held at Cannes in southern France. It was a very good
junket and it was made more pleasant by the fine hos­
pitality of the French. I went there to serve my news­
paper, the Popolo (VJtalia. What an excellent occasion
it was to distract public opinion from our internal crisis,
at least temporarily! We could examine thoroughly, in­
stead of domestic thorns, problems of international char­
acter!
At Cannes I wanted to interview the great world
politicians—responsible men. I would have liked, from
a full survey, to have informed J talian public opinion as
to the various ingredients which we could find in the
pudding of our international situation. The Cannes con­
ference was the overture to the opera of the conference
in Genoa. Italy should have selected her own policy. It
should have been one which would not betray vital in­
terests arising from our most urgent historic and po­
litical necessities.
At any rate because of these considerations, I decided
to go to Cannes. I collected ten thousand lire for neces­
sary expenses. My brother, Arnaldo, went to convert
them at a money changer and brought me the equivalent
in French money, which amounted to no more than five
thousand, two hundred francs. Though I had followed

Toward Conquest of Power 149
the course of foreign exchange this little personal ex­
perience made a deep impression. It made me realize an
angular fact; the Italian currency had lost nearly half
of its value in comparison to French currency! It was
a grave symptom. It was a humiliation. It was a blow
to the self respect of a victorious nation, a vexing weathervane; it indicated our progress* toward bankruptcy!
Up leaped the thought that this situation must be cured
by the vital strength of Fascism. It was one of our
opportunities; the desperate developments unfortu­
nately had not compelled the government, or political
parties, or parliament itself to act. The monstrosity of
inflation instead gave to everybody a fatuous, inconsis­
tent, artificial sense of prosperity.
The Cannes conference had no importance; it was a
preface for Genoa. It was clothed in an atmosphere of
indifference. International meetings had followed each
other with tiresome regularity here and there in resorts
of Europe which appeared pleasant places to hold meet­
ings. The last reunions had lost interest and were, in­
stead of being important, the object of newspaper satire
and of mocking “couplets” in comic reviews. To me,
however, the sojourn at Cannes gave a means of ex­
tracting personally, from a direct and realistic exami­
nation of peoples and events, deep and well-rooted
conclusions.
The Cannes conference had provoked a sudden min­
isterial crisis in France. Briand, whom I interviewed in
the course of these days, resigned without waiting for
a vote of the Chamber of Deputies. And I, in an article

150

My Autobiography

of January 14th, 1922, entitled “After Cannes,” having
given due weight to the numerous sharp interrogation
marks of the international situation, concluded:
“The unsolved problems, questionings and challenges
could be ranged in line to infinity. 11 is urgent, instead,
to take note of the most important lesson of the French
crisis. It is a bitter verification. II will bring the masses
of the popidations who suffer morally and economically
to say in their hearts, ‘These gentlemen are either with­
out conscience, or they are powerless and flabby. They
either have no wish to make peace or they are not able
to make it. A Europe in such terrible spiritual and eco­
nomic conditions as those of the present must embark
on reason or sink. The Europe of to-morrow, broken in
divisions of impoverished peoples, may become a col­
ony: two other continents are already high up on the
horizon of history!’ ”
To the plight disclosed by the wide picture of the
European horizon unfolding to my eyes, was to be
added that due to our domestic troubles, always growing
a little worse.
I have always spoken as a journalist, as a politician,
as a deputy, of the existence of two Italies. One ap­
peared to me freed from servitude. It was noble, proud,
loyal, devoutly dedicated by a bloody sacrifice of war,
resolved to be always in the first rank to defend the
right, the privilege and the great name of the Italian
people. On the other side, however, I saw another Italy,
dull to any consciousness of nobility and power, indif­
ferent to origin and traditions, serving obscure “isms,”

Toward Conquest of Power 151
a slave to apathetic tendencies, cold, egotistic, incapa­
ble of gallantry, dead to sacrifice.
In a thousand hardships, in numerous fights, those
two Italies were arrayed by immutable destiny one
against the other; their opposition was revealed in
bloody manifestations, typical of the fierce and final
struggle between the Fascisti and their enemies. To see
in its right light the character of this antithesis, let us
examine some of the typical episodes.
In Pistoia, for instance, a brave officer, Lieutenant
Federico Florio, who fought valiantly during the War
and who had followed D’Annunzio in Fiume, was
treacherously murdered by a deserter anarchist, Cafiero
Lucchesi. It was a crime premeditated by a craven to
strike down a gallant man. This criminal outrage filled
the souls of the Fascisti with utter indignation. The last
words of our martyr were simple and solemn, “I am
sorry now I will not be able to do something else for my
Country.” No more. Then the agony came. I felt that
such sacrifices cemented indissolubly the unity of Fas­
cism.
“A formidable cement!” I wrote in my paper. “It
binds the Fascisti legions; a sacred and intangible bond
keeps close the faithful of the Littorio. It is the sacred
bond of our dead. They are hundreds. Youths. Mature
men. Not a party in Italy, nor any movement in recent
Italian history can be compared to Fascism. Not one
ideal has been like the Fascist—consecrated by the blood
of so many young souls.
“If Fascism were not a faith, how did it or could it

152

My Autobiography

give stoicism and courage to its legions? Only a faith
which has reached the heights, only a faith can suggest
those words that came out from the lips of Federico
Florio, already bloodless and gray. Those words are a
document; they are a testament. They are as simple and
as grave as a passage from the Gospel.
“The Fascisti of all Italy must receive and meditate
these words—in silence—hut unceasingly marching, al­
ways more determined—toward the goal! No obstacle
will ever stop them.”
All of us had full realization of the command and the
impulse which came from the dead. When faith leaps
out of the hearts of martyrs it carries irresistibly the
sure impression of nobility, and brands men with the
symbol of its eternal greatness.
The groups of the Fascisti, their meetings, their com­
pact parades, and their services in patriotism had as
ideal leaders our martyrs, invincible knights of the Fas­
cist faith and passion. We called them by name, one by
one, with firm and sure voice. At every name, the com­
rades answered, “Present.” This was a simple rite; it
had all the value and the affirmation of a vow.
Quite an opposite symptom of the two contrasting
Italies was plainly manifested in the politics displayed
by the two senators, Credaro and Salata, who were in
border zones, as high commissioners of the govern­
ment. These two men seemed to ask from the natives
who were not of Italian blood a kind of mercy and
tolerance for the fact that they themselves were Italians.
No demand of the German-speaking people on the

Toward Conquest of Power 153
frontier was considered unjustified. Little by little, fol­
lowing that policy of cowardice and servitude, we re­
nounced our well-defined rights, sanctified by the blood
spilled by volunteer heroes. Already in June, 1921—as
I said in the preceding chapter—without mincing words
I had denounced and ridiculed in the presence of all the
chamber of parliament the work done by Credaro and
Salata. Their destructive, eroding activity, however,
continued. The Fascisti, confronted by successive proofs
of such innate and inane weakness, were roused; they
accused the two governors with violent words. On Jan­
uary 17th, 1922, at the meeting held in Triest, the
Fascisti demanded the recall of Salata and the sup­
pression of the central office for the New Provinces.
That campaign succeeded in making its own way some
time afterward. In fact the two senators, Credaro and
Salata were recalled even though they were replaced by
the government. But the consequence of their errors
were to be suffered for a weary time. Quite differently,
with pride and dignity, would the black shirts have garri­
soned the sacred limits of the Brenner and the Nevosso.
In that period of bitter charges, counter charges, de­
bates and squabbles, while the European horizon was
still filled with thunder storms, came the death of the
Pontiff Benedict XV, Giacomo della Chiesa, of a noble
family of Genoa. He passed away January 22nd, 1922.
He had ruled the Church in the stormiest period of the
war, following Pius X, the kind-hearted patriarch of
Venice, who distinguished his pontificate by a strong
battle against the fads of political and religious mod­
ernism.

154

My Autobiography

Benedict XV did not leave in our souls a sympathetic
memory. We could not, if we tried, forget that in 1917,
while people were struggling, when we had already seen
the fall of Czarism and the Russian revolution with the
defection of the armies on the eastern front, the Pontiff
defined the war with the unhappy expression, “a use­
less massacre.” That phrase, inconceivable in such a
terrible moment, was a blow to those who had faith in
sacrifice for an ideal and who hoped the war would
correct many deep-rooted historical injustices. Besides,
war had been our invention; the Catholic Church had
ever been a stranger to wars, when she did not provoke
them herself. And yet, the ambiguous conduct of the
Pope amid the fighting nations is considered nowadays
by some zealous persons who are deficient in critical
sense and blind to historical consciousness, as the maxi­
mum of equity and the essence of an objective spirit.
But that attitude and its expression had, for us Ital­
ians, a very different value. It served to make evident
an anomalous phase of Italy’s situation—that is, the
position of the Pontiff in Rome during a period in which
Italy was engaged in a terrible struggle. For that rea­
son, on the death of Benedict XV, the succession to the
pontificate took on at that moment a particular impor­
tance for the future.
There is a saying in our country which is applied to
the most extraordinary events to imply that the most
complex things can be reduced to very simple terms.
The expression is, “When a Pope is dead, another one
is made.” There is no comment to be made on that

Toward Conquest of Power 155
simple statement. But to succeed to the throne of St.
Peter, to become the worthy substitute for the Prince
of the Apostles, to represent on earth the Divinity of
Christ, is one thing; the weight and value of a conclusion
reached by an elective assembly is another. In view of
the relationship that existed between the State and the
Church in Italy one can easily understand that there
could be reasons for apprehension, as well as deep in­
terest in the results of the Conclave. The eyes of all the
Catholic world were turned toward Rome. Great vexa­
tions stirred all the European chanceries; secret influ­
ences were penetrating deep places; they were trying to
suppress and overpower each other.
Spectators and diplomats of every country in the
world were spell bound by the complexities at the very
moment that preparations for the Conclave were being
made, when all Rome was getting ready to wait pa­
tiently in the Plaza of St. Peter’s during the balloting.
Meanwhile in Italy there arose a debate on the po­
litical effects of Benedict XV. Various prophecies were
made as to his successor; the journalistic row that went
on had never been surpassed. Many problems of vast
consequences were superficially treated.
The fall of the Bonomi ministry, attributed to ineffi­
ciency in domestic politics and to the fall of the Banca
Italiana di Sconto, was really due to the failure of a
commemoration for Pope Benedict XV from the na­
tional parliament.
I had already on various occasions disclosed to the
Fascisti, whom I considered and consider always the

156

My Autobiography

aristocracy of Italy, that our religious ideal had in itself
moral attributes of first importance. I had affirmed the
necessity of condemning the unfruitful conception, ab­
surd and artificial, of affected or vicious anti-clericalism.
That tendency not only kept us in a situation of moral
inferiority as compared with other peoples, but also
divided the Italians in the religious field into various
schools of thought. Above all it exposed us to such cor­
rupting, sinister and tortuous power as that of interna­
tional Masonry of a political type, as distinguished from
the Masonry known iu the Anglo-Saxon countries.
I had wanted to show that the problem of the rela­
tions between the State and the Church in Italy was
not to be considered insoluble, and lo explain how nec­
essary it was to create, after a calm and impartial ob­
jective examination, an atmosphere of understanding,
in order to give to the Italian people a basis for a life
of harmony between religious faith and civil life.
The Fascisti, as intelligent people worthy of the
epoch in which they were living, followed me in the new
conception of religious policy. To it was attached our
war against Masonry as we knew Masonry in Italy. It
was a war of fundamental importance and Fascism was
almost unanimous in a determination to fight it to the
end.
Let us not forget that the Masons of Italy have al­
ways represented a distortion, not only in political life,
but in spiritual concepts. All the strength of Masonry
was directed against the papal policies, but this struggle
represented no real and profound ideal. The secret so­

Toward Conquest of Power 157
ciety from a practical point of view rested on an associa­
tion of mutual adulation, of reciprocal aid, of pernicious
nepotism and favoritism. To become powerful and to
consummate its underhanded dealings, Masonry made
use of the weaknesses of the Liberal governments that
succeeded each other in Italy after 1870 to extend its
machinations in the bureaucracy, in the magistracy, in
the field of education, and also in the army, so that it
could dominate the vital ganglions of the whole nation.
Its secret character throughout the twentieth century,
its mysterious meetings, abhorrent to our beautiful
communities with their sunlight and their love of truth,
gave to the sect the character of corruption, a crooked
concept of life, without programme, without soul, with­
out moral value.
My antipathy for that disgusting form of secret as­
sociation goes back to my youth. Long before, at the
Socialist congress of Ancona in 1914, I had presented
to my comrades the dilemma: Socialists or Masons?
That point of view had won a complete triumph, in
spite of the strong opposition of the Mason-socialists.
Later, in Fascism, I made the same gesture of
strength. It took courage. I obeyed the positive com­
mand of my conscience, and not any opportunism. My
attitude had nothing in common with the anti-Masonic
spirit of the Jesuits. They acted for reasons of defense.
After all, their inner organization as a religious society
is almost completely unknown.
For my direct, methodical and consistent course of
policy the hate of the Masonic sect persecutes me even

158

My Autobiography

now. Masonry of that type has been beaten in Italy,
but it operates and conspires behind mask of the inter­
national anti-Fascism. It utterly fails to defeat me. It
tries to throw mud at me, but the insult does not reach
its mark. It machinates plots and crimes, but the hired
assassins do not control my destiny. It. goes gossiping
about my weaknesses, and the supposed organic afflic­
tions of my body, but I am more alive and stronger than
ever.
This is a war without quarter, a war of which I am a
veteran. Every time that I have wanted to cauterize
difficult situations in Italian political life, every time
that I have wanted to give a sincere, frank and loyal
moral rectitude to the personnel in politics, I have al­
ways had against me our Masonry! Hut that organiza­
tion, which in other times was very powerful, has been
beaten by me. Against me it did not and cannot win.
Italians won this battle for me. They found the cure for
this leprosy.
To-day in Italy we breathe the open air; life is ex­
posed to the light of day.
When Bonomi fell, the King consulted with many
minds. I too was called twice to the Quirinal, his official
palace, where conferences are held. Obvious reasons of
reserve forbid me to make known what I said to the
Sovereign. This political crisis took on abnormal as­
pects. We groped in the dark. The number of men in
the political field who were fit to fill a minority was very
limited. They looked toward Orlando, then toward De
Nicola, but nobody wanted to accept the responsibility

Toward Conquest of Power 159
of forming a ministry under the prevailing conditions.
They were obliged to go back to llonomi, who fell for
the second time on the “via crucis” when he presented
himself again at the chamber.
New consultations and new suggestions were made.
Always the same names were given: Orlando, De
Nicola, Bonomi. The picture presented that degree of
helplessness which has afflicted so many democracies,
and which has enabled many countries to vie with each
other in the humiliating and derisive boast that they
have had more governments and ministries than years
of existence! The requirements for leadership were un­
changed—the ability to compromise principles and
sometimes even integrity, to barter and negotiate with
palavering artistry in an effort to build another shaky
structure which would perpetuate the whole depressing
system. This system may be dear to the heart of doc­
trinaires. It was quite another affair in practice.
The “Popular” or “Catholic” party, following its bad
political instinct, which caused it to be ultra conservative
under cover and revolutionary in the street and in par­
liament, vetoed any return of Giolitti. The posture of
the “popolari” was quite unique. Unfortunately they
controlled a strong group in the chamber. While they
refused to accept the responsibility of power, they bluepencilled Giolitti and denied support to Bonomi. They
rendered the composition of any ministry well-nigh im­
possible even as a makeshift.
In spite of repeated consultations the same names al­
ways came to the surface. It was such a stagnation as

160

My Autobiography

comes finally to weak democracies. It was tearing to
pieces political logic, common sense, and, unfortunately,
also Italy herself.
At last the Facta ministry was formed. This mediocre
selection of a member of parliament, closely bound to
Giolitti, was made as the only anchor of safety in an
absurd extravaganza. Every day we went down one
step on the stairs of dignity. Nevertheless, because of
the conditions, and because Facta undertook a burden
that nobody else wanted, 1 did not hesitate to declare
in my paper that the new cabinet, colorless as it was,
might function to some end. I was prepared to say that
it could represent, if nothing else, a will to go on, at
least in the affairs of ordinary routine administration.
It is bad enough to suffer a government which creates
nothing; it is even worse to suffer a system of politics
which cannot of itself create even an administration!
Facta was an old veteran of parliament and I feel
sure that he was a gentleman stamped out by the old
die. Respectful of the third rate political morals of the
men of his age, he had only one devotion. That was for
his teacher, Giolitti. Facta had been a discreet Minister
of the Treasury in other times. He had not, as even his
friends admitted, the strength and authority needed to
draw up a ministry at a serious moment. He had to
face the gas and smoke of the struggle between parties,
of the pretensions of the “popolari,” of the growing
strength of Fascism, and, finally, a delicate interna­
tional situation abroad.
It was in just such ways that the old “liberal” Italy

Toward Conquest of Power 161
with its petty dealing with problems, its little parlia­
mentary pea-shooting, its unworthy plots in corridor
and cloak rooms, ante-rooms and sidewalk cafes, for
puny personal power, its recurring crises, its journal­
istic bickerings, was breaking the real Italy. Italy, with
its struggling co-operatives, its inadequate rural banks,
its mean and superficial measures of economy, its in­
capable and improvident charity! Italy, in its position
of humble servant, with napkin on arm to wipe other
mouths at international conferences! Italy, prolific and
powerful! Italy, like a mother able to supply, even for
foreign ingratitude, laborious sons to make fruitful
other soils, other climates, other cities and other peoples!
Such was her leadership; such was her plight!
Facta was the man who fully represented that old
world. Facta was the first to be surprised that he had
suddenly found so many admirers. He often said that
he failed to understand why he should be at the head
of the Italian government. This timid member of par­
liament forgot that all these people around him who
gave him by their mouthings a sensation of strength and
influence were only the survivors of an old LiberalDemocratic world, incapable of living, outdated, ship­
wrecked, clinging for safety to the last Liberal planks
of compromise.
But the powerful machine of Fascism was already in
motion. Nobody could step into its path to stop it, for
it had one aim: to give a government to Italy.
In these days there were some attempts at Fascist
secession and schism. I removed them with a few strokes

162

My Autobiography

of the pen and a few measures taken within. I was
troubled less by mistaken disaffections than by a single
grave incident in Fiume. There a renegade Italian, Zanella, nursed and nourished an ignoble anti-Italian plot.
The Fascisti imposed banishment upon him. This evil
representative of the autonomists and of the Jugo-Slavs
was obliged to leave the unhappy city which without
Italy would never have been able to put its lips to the
cup of peace.
At this time Charles of Ilapshurg died, after having
twice tried vainly to seize again the crown of Saint
Stephen. The nemesis of history completed its work and
took away from the Ilapshurg line the last possibility
of return. In Italian history this reigning house had rep­
resented always a most unfortunate influence. It had
been invariably adverse to our solidarity.
Without attracting deep attention or intelligent pub­
lic interest, living this way and that, up and down by
alternate hopes and crises, optimisms and weary de­
spairs—came the Conference of Genoa.
On the first of that May was celebrated the so-called
Festival of Labor. Unfortunately the only distinctions
given this festival were an increased outburst of Socialist
and Communist attacks and ambushes. Even the anni­
versary of the declaration of war, May 24th, was sad­
dened by blood. Solemn celebrations were held through­
out Italy, but in Rome the Communists dared to fire at
the parade which was doing honor to Enrico Toti, the
Roman who, besides his life, had hurled against the fugi­
tive enemy also his crutches. One person fell dead and
there were twenty-four wounded.

Toward Conquest of Power 163
As if that was not enough the Alliance of Labor, a
hybrid coalition of all the anti-Fascist groups, pro­
claimed a general strike.
It was too much! There was no sign of any act of
energy from the government. Without hesitation I or­
dered a general mobilization of the Fascisti. I affirmed
on my word of honor that we would break the back of
the attempt of the red rabble. “We are sure to smash,
we say crush, this bad beast once for all.”
Considering the timid behavior of the middle classes
and of the government, this virile decision, taken after
full analysis, with full determination and full responsi­
bility, served as a cold douche for the socialists and the
reds. The Fascist mobilization came like lightning.
On the same day the strike ended.
While the public streets, squares and fields were be­
ing put in order by the energetic intervention of the
Fascisti, in the parliament at Montecitorio the usual in­
trigues went on. There was oscillation of plans and pro­
grammes. These ranged from proposals of a dictator­
ship to collaboration with the reds! In the general ma­
rasmus there came on July 12th a statement from the
Minister of the Treasury, Peano, which marked for me
the maximum of our anxiety.
The budget of the nation had a deficit of six billions
and a half. It was a terrific figure for Italy. It was a
situation impossible for our economic structure to bear.
To errors in foreign and domestic policy was added
financial chaos. Minister Facta in record-breaking speed
had demonstrated his incapacity in every way. I made

164

My Autobiography

a speech in parliament on July 19th, 1922, in which I
specifically and flatly withdrew from the ministry the
votes of the Fascist group. After having demonstrated
the equivocal position of the Socialists, who wanted to
collaborate with the government so that they might
blackmail it the better, and of the “popolari” who
wrongly considered themselves supreme rulers of the
situation, I said these clear and sharp words to the
Premier himself:
“Honorable Facta, 1 tell you that your ministry can­
not live because it is unbecoming from every point of
view. Your ministry cannot live, I might better say
vegetate, or drag its life along, thanks to the charity of
all those who sustain you. The traditional rope in the
same manner sustains the not less traditional hanged.
After all, your makers are there to testify to the char­
acter of your ministry; you have been the first to be
surprised into the presidency of the council.”
I went on then to examine the disheartening mis­
takes of the Facta policies and I concluded by asserting
that Fascism by getting away from the parliamentary
majority, had accomplished a “gesture of high political
and moral modesty. . . .” “It is impossible to be part
of the majority,” I added, “and at the same time act
outside as Fascism is now forced to act.”
These words excited a brisk stir of mumbles, exclama­
tions, and comments, which went to a higher pitch when
I added:
“Fascism will make its own decisions. Probably it will
soon say if it wants to become a legitimate party, for

Toward Conquest of Power 165
that means a government party, or if it will instead be
a party of insurrection. In the latter case it will no
longer be able to be part of any governmental majority.
Consequently it will not be obliged to sit in this cham­
ber.”
I gave in that way, not only to the dying Facta min­
istry, but also to any other new government, an ener­
getic and unmistakable warning. I had put up the sign­
board of my intentions and declared in the open where
I stood.
On that day the Facta ministry fell. And immedi­
ately they began to grope in the dark again, trying to
find a successor. Orlando, Bonomi, Facta, Giolitti.
Again these were the names mouthed about.
By process of deductions and eliminations the name
finally hit upon was Meda. He was the Popular party
deputy from Milan, and the chief of the “popolari”
deputies who with their secret, sinister tactics kept any
ministry under their power. Meda, who had already been
a minister, made his gesture of refusal and renunciation
because of fear. That was our paradox—nobodjr in
Italy, amid this so-called strength of the constituted
order, which included priests and radicals, wanted or
was able to assume responsibility of power. Whatever
claims “liberalism” and “democracy” had for power,
now at least nobody would touch the treasure.
In this situation the socialists cheerfully blackmailed
the nation, while the Fascisti were silently preparing the
yeast and the bread, the will and the weapons for an
insurrection of national dignity.

166

My Autobiography

While the conferences to find ways out of the crisis
went on slowly, at the moment of inability to constitute
a government there came about in Italy an almost in­
conceivable situation. All the strength of the left party,
not only those openly subversive, but also the organiza­
tion of the Labor Confederation, the Socialist parlia­
mentary group, the Democratic groups, and the Re­
publicans, staged a general strike all over Italy. Its
character was typically and solely anti-Fascist. Its pre­
tense was to save the liberty of the people, threatened
by Fascism!
This galaxy of political elements, more despicable
than riffraff, these inert, wasteful, hopeless forces which
in the past had massacred every liberty and had tram­
pled in every imaginable way on our morals, our peace,
our efficiency, and our order, could not have done a
more illogical, a more unjust, a more offensive and
provocative act toward Fascism and the Italian people.
The days marked by these sinister forces were days
in which I made irrevocable decisions. Our development
brought by degrees a political and a military reserve
strength, which was to bring us in the end to the March
on Rome and the conquest of power.
As an answer to the anti-Fascist provocation, I or­
dered another general mobilization of the Fascisti. The
council of the “Fasci Italiani di combattimento” was
ordered to sit permanently. The Fascist technicians
were to be brought together to continue the work in the
public services. The “squadristi” were to disperse sub­
versive organizations. The Fascisti of Milan assaulted

Toward Conquest of Power 167
the Avanti, which was considered the lair of our op­
ponents. They burned the offices. They occupied the
street-car barns. They began to make the public services
operative in spite of the declared strike.
To crush a strike the government was powerless, but
a new strength had been substituted for the govern­
ment! The Fascisti, well armed, occupied the electric
stations in order to prevent acts of sabotage. It was nec­
essary to destroy forever all the nerve centres of dis­
order. The Fascisti did it.
In Milan alone three young black shirts lost their
lives. Of these, two were university students. We had
many wounded boys.
The trial of strength, however, was successful. The
enemies of Italy were taken with convulsions. They
tossed responsibilities back and forth in foolish oratori­
cal and literary battles. The life of the people had come
back to a normal rhythm. Fascism had revealed a pro­
found strength, one able to dominate our Italy of to­
morrow, not only in the sense of mere force, but in
determination, fundamental wisdom, character and un­
selfish patriotism.
Our antagonists were defeated, confused and humili­
ated. One of those who called themselves interpreters
of the liberal idea recognized—how generous!—that
Fascism was now a power which could not be neglected.
The Corriere della Sera, the serious and in some ways
admirable Milan newspaper—which had always used
its circulation to become the speaking trumpet for the
spirit of moribund, middle class mediocrity—had given,

168

My Autobiography

in the past, a sort of halo to Filippo Turati, the Socialist
leader. Now it felt that it was necessary to give a bit of
space to recognize the right of Fascism to participation
in the government. The unsettled crisis went lumber­
ing along. I was again called by the King. I had some
interviews with Orlando. One after another all the pro­
jected combinations fell apart and were put aside like
old rejected castings. So, wearily, they came back to
Facta. He sent one of his emissaries to me and asked me
under what conditions the Fascisti would accept places
in the new government. I sent back word by the mes­
senger that Fascism would ask for the most important
offices.
I was urged to take a position in the Cabinet, but how
absurd! Naturally I had to stay out of the coalition so
that I could maintain my freedom to criticise, and if
need be to take action. My claims, however, for Fascist
representation were judged immoderate. The ill-starred
Facta ministry was launched without us, but as the ship
took the water the nation’s sole greeting was a mutter
of contempt and indifference.
Friends and enemies both looked only toward Fas­
cism. It was the one element that sparked interest in
the life of the Italian people.
I had made up my mind to lead the black shirts my­
self. I already had crystallized my determination to
march on Rome.
The situation admitted of no other solution.
I called to Milan on October 16th a general who had
special fitness and who was saturated by real Fascist

Toward Conquest of Power 169
faith. I made a scheme of military and political organ­
ization on the model of the old Roman legions. The
Fascisti were divided by me into “principi” and “triari.”
We created, after conferring with the high leaders, a
slogan, a uniform, and a watchword. I knew perfectly
the Fascist and anti-Fascist situation in every region of
Italy. I could march on Rome along the Tyrrhenian
sea, deviating toward Umbria. From the south the com­
pact formations of Puglie and Naples could join me.
The only obstacle was a hostile zone, which centred in
Ancona. I called Arpinati and other lieutenants of Fas­
cism and ordered them to free Ancona from social-com­
munist domination. The town, which was known to be
in the hands of the anarchists, was conquered by maneuvres carried out in perfect military fashion. There
were some dead and wounded. Too bad! But now the
remnants of the anti-Fascist forces were destroyed.
Anti-Fascism was now concentrated in Rome; it was
driven back to its barrack on Montecitorio, where par­
liament sat.
A new sunshine broke over the multitudes of our
provinces. We could all breathe with full lungs. The
brave effort of Fascism was now rising with the flood
tide of its full efficiency. Critics of reputation, historians
of wide-world fame, studious people from every part of
the earth were beginning to regard with quickening in­
terest the movement I had created and dominated and
was leading toward victory.
WTiile I was penning some editorials against repre­
sentatives of the sceptics, I wrote: “Fascism is to-day in

170

My Autobiography

the first stage of its life: the one of Christ. Don’t be in a
hurry; the one of Saint Paul will come.”
I was preparing then every minute the details of the
conquest of Rome and of power. I was certainly not
moved by any mirage of personal power, nor by any
other allurement, nor by a desire for egotistical political
domination.
I have always had a vision of life which was altruistic.
I have groped in the dark of theories, but I groped not
to relieve myself, but to bring something to others. I
have fought, but not for my advantage, indirect or im­
mediate. I have aimed for the supreme advantages of
my nation. I desired finally that Fascism should rule
Italy for her glory and her good fortune.
I cannot, for obvious reasons, discuss all the measures,
even some of the most simple, that I took in this period.
Some are of political and secret character about which
reserve is absolutely necessary. The Popolo d’Italia,
my paper, without attracting too much attention from
outsiders and from my enemies, had become the head­
quarters of the spiritual and material preparation for
the March on Rome. It was the hub of our thought and
action. The military and the political forces both obeyed
my command. I weighed all the plans and proposals.
Having made my own plan at last I gave the necessary
orders. Then there began extensive preparatory maneuvres, such as the occupation of Trento, of Ancona
and of Bolzano—places which might threaten our
strategy.
I wanted to inform myself about the state of mind

Toward Conquest of Power 171
of the Fascisti, about their efficiency and their determi­
nation. Accordingly I went to make four important
speeches in different parts of Italy. In those speeches I
set forth the policies of to-morrow. I defined the ulti­
mate goal of Fascism. It was candidly stated. It was
the conquest of power. I didn’t want to ingratiate my­
self with the masses. I have always spoken with naked
candor and even with brutality to the multitudes. That
is a distinct contrast to the contemptible courtship made
for their favor by the political parties of every time and
every land.
On September 17th, 1922, for instance, one month
before the March on Rome, I wrote that it was neces­
sary to “throw down, from the altars erected by the
‘Demos,’ His Holiness the Mass!”
The Fascisti meetings which I attended were held in
Udine, which is in northern Italy, in Cremona, which
lies in the valley of the Po, in industrial Milan and in
Naples, the centre of southern Italy. I wanted to be
personally acquainted with the spirit of those districts,
each with a nobility of its own. I was acclaimed as a
conqueror and a saviour. This flattered me, but be sure
that it did not make me proud. I felt stronger, and yet
realized the more that I faced mountains of responsi­
bility. In those four cities, so different and so far one
from the other, I saw the same light! I had with me the
honest, the good, the pure, the sincere soul of the Italian
people!
I assembled the Central Committee of the Fasci Italiani di Combattimento—the Bundles of Fight—and we

172

My Autobiography

came to an accord on the outlines of the movement,
which was to lead the black shirts triumphantly along
the sacred roads to Rome.
Speaking in those days at the Circolo Sciesa of Milan
I said to my trusted men that we finally had come to the
“sad sunset of Liberalism, and to the Fascist-dawn of
a new Italy.”

CHAPTER IX

THUS WE TOOK ROME

D now we were on the eve of the historic march
on the Eternal City.
Having completed my survey and estimate of
conditions in the provinces, having listened to the re­
ports of the various chiefs of the black shirts, having
selected the plans of action and having determined in a
general way upon the most favorable moment, I called
together in Florence the chiefs of the Fascist movement
and of the squads of action. There were Michele Bianchi, De Bono, Italo Balbo, Giuriati, and various
others. Some one at that quiet conference suggested the
mobilization of the black shirts for November 4th, the
anniversary of the Victory. I rejected that proposal,
for it would have spoiled a day of commemoration by
introducing the element of revolutionary activity.
It was necessary to give our movement the full ad­
vantage of opportunity and to make it spark and de­
tonate. It was necessary to weigh, besides the military
aspects, the political effects and values. We had to con­
sider, finally, the painful possibility of a violent sup­
pression, or a failure spreading from some slip to all
of our plans. We were obliged to determine beforehand
173

174

My Autobiography

all the hows and whens, the details of the means, with
what men and with what aims the Fascist assault could
most wisely be launched.
The Fascist meeting in Naples, which was advertised
as our second great congress, with its display of disci­
pline and of speech-making, served to hide the begin­
nings of the real mobilization. At a fixed moment the
squads of action of all Italy were to be in arms. They
would have to occupy the vital nerve centres—the cities,
and the post offices, the prefectures, police headquarters,
railroad stations, and military barracks.
Detachments of Fascisti were to march along the
Tyrrhenian Sea, toward Rome, led by chiefs, all of them
brave former officers. The same movement was to take
place on the Adriatic side, from which direction was to
be launched on Rome the strength of the low Romagna,
Marche and Abruzzi districts. That plan required that
we should free Ancona from the social-communist do­
minion. This had been done. From middle Italy the
squadrons already mobilized for the meeting at Naples
were also to be directed upon Rome. They were sup­
ported by groups of Fascist cavalry under the command
of Caradonna.
The moment the Fascist mobilization and campaign
was decided and actually began operation, martial law,
the stern rules and orders of Fascism both for officers
and privates, were to be enforced.
The political powers of our “National Directorate”
were turned over to a military quadrumvirate of action
in the persons of Generals De Bono, De Vecchi, Italo

Thus We Took Rome

1.75

Balbo and Michele Bianchi. I presided over the quadrumvirate and I was the Duce (the leader) and had the
ultimate responsibility for the work of the four men—
a responsibility for which I was fully pledged not only
to the Fascisti but to Italy.
We selected as general concentration headquarters
the town of Perugia, capital of Umbria, where many
roads flow to a centre and from which it is easy to reach
Rome. In case of military and political failure we could,
by crossing the Appennine range, retire to the Valley
of the Po. In any revolutionary movement of history
that zone has always been properly considered the key­
stone of any situation. There our domination was abso­
lute and undisputed. We selected the watchword; we
fixed the details of the action. Everything had to be re­
ported to me—in the offices of the Popolo d’ltalia.
Trusted Fascist messengers wove webs like scurrying
spiders. All day long I was issuing the necessary or­
ders. I wrote the proclamation which was to be ad­
dressed to the country on the eve of action. We knew
from very faithful unforgettable friends that the army,
unless exceptional circumstances arose, would maintain
itself on a ground of amiable neutrality.
At the historic congress at Naples, after my open­
ing speech, which traced the outlines of the Fascist ac­
tion in the state and assigned to Naples the title “Queen
of the Mediterranean,” the general discussion contin­
ued in academic tone, without a definite aim except that
of gaining time. The leader in that dissembling and
sham discussion was Michele Bianchi, one of the qua-

176

My Autobiography

drumvirate for the march on Rome. At that time he
had already revealed a notable political mind. De Bono
and Balbo, who had great authority over the squadrons
of action, joined the general headquarters in Perugia.
I went from the adjourned congress back to Milan.
During the trip I had an opportunity to see many
friends and to make additional preparations. I had im­
portant conversations regarding that particular drive
which had to be organized in Milan, as in other centres
of the Lombardy district. In order not to arouse the
suspicion of the police, for I was always surrounded by
spies, I assumed the attitude of an indifferent person
without a worry or trouble in the world. This was some­
what difficult, for I had to spend precious time in try­
ing the speed of a new car, and in other workaday com­
ings and goings. In the evenings I went to the theatres.
I pretended to have a great spirit of activity in my edi­
torial writing and newspaper management.
But suddenly, when I knew that everything was
ready, I issued from Milan, through the Popolo d’Italia,
by means of independent publications, and through the
correspondents of all the Italian newspapers, my proc­
lamation of revolution. It had been signed by the quad­
rumvirate. Here is the text of the memorable document:
“Fascisti! Italians!
“The time for determined battle has come! Four years ago
at this season the national army loosed the final offensive
which brought it to Victory. To-day the army of the black
shirts again takes possession of that Victory, which has
been mutilated, and, going directly to Rome, brings Victory

Thus We Took Rome

177

again to the glory of that Capitol. From now on ‘principi’
and ‘triari’ are mobilized. The martial law of Fascism now
becomes a fact. By order of the Duce all the military, po­
litical and administrative functions of the party manage­
ment are taken over by a secret Quadrumvirate of Action
with dictatorial powers.
“The army, the reserve and safeguard of the Nation,
must not take part in this struggle. Fascism renews its
highest homage given to the Army of Vittorio Veneto. Fas­
cism, furthermore, does not march against the police, but
against a political class both cowardly and imbecile, which
in four long years has not been able to give a Government
to the Nation. Those who form the productive class must
know that Fascism wants to impose nothing more than or­
der and discipline upon the Nation and to help to raise the
strength which will renew progress and prosperity. The
people who work in the fields and in the factories, those who
work in the railroads or in offices, have nothing to fear from
the Fascist Government. Their just rights will be protected.
We will even be generous with unarmed adversaries.
“Fascism draws its sword to cut the multiple Gordian
knots which tie and burden Italian life. We call God and
the spirit of our five hundred thousand dead to witness that
only one impulse sends us on, that only one passion burns
within us—the impulse and the passion to contribute to the
safety and greatness of our Country.
“Fascisti of all Italy!
“Stretch forth like Romans your spirits and your sinews!
We must win. We will.
“Long live Italy! Long live Fascism!
“The Quadrumvirate.”

At night there reached me the first news of bloody
clashes in Cremona, Alessandri and Bologna, and of the
assaults on munition factories and upon military bar­
racks. I had composed my proclamation in a very short

178

My Autobiography

and resounding form; it had impressed the whole of the
Italian people. Our life was suddenly brought into an
ardent atmosphere of revolution. News of the strug­
gles that were taking place in the various cities, some­
times exaggerated by the imaginations of reporters,
gave a dramatic touch to the revolution. Responsible
elements of the country asserted that as a result of this
movement there would at last be a government able to
rule and to command respect. The great mass of the
population, however, looked out astonished, as it were,
from their windows.
None of the subversive or liberal chiefs showed him­
self. All went into their holes, inspired only by fear.
They understood quite thoroughly that this was the
striking of our hour. Every one felt sure that the strug­
gle of Fascism would have a victorious outcome. I could
sense this even from far away. The air was full of it.
The wind spoke of it. The rain brought it down. The
earth drank it in.
I put on the black shirt. I barricaded the Popolo
d’ltalia. In the livid and gray morning Milan had a new
and fantastic appearance. Pauses and sudden silences
gave one the sensation of certain great hours that come
and go in the course of history.
Frowning battalions of Royal Guards scouted the
city and the monotonous rhythm of their feet sounded
ominous echoes in the almost deserted streets.
The public services functioned on a reduced and mea­
gre scale. The assaults of the Fascisti against the bar­
racks and on the post offices were cause for fusillades

Thus We Took Rome

179

of shots, which gave to the city a sinister echo of civil
war.
I had provided the offices of my newspaper with
everything needful for defense against attack. I knew
that if the government authorities desired to give a
proof of their strength they would have directed their
first violent assault at the Popolo d’ltalia. In fact, in the
early hours of the morning, I saw trained upon the
offices and upon me the ugly muzzles of the mitrail­
leuses. There was a rapid exchange of shots. I had my
rifle charged and went down to defend the doors. The
neighbors had barricaded entrances and windows and
were begging for protection.
During the firing bullets whistled around my ears.
A major of the Royal Guard finally asked for a truce
in order to talk with me. After a brief initial conversa­
tion, we agreed that the Royal Guard should withdraw
as far as two hundred metres and that the mitrailleuses
were to be removed from the middle of the street and
placed at a crossing of the street, about a hundred me­
tres away. With that sort of armistice began for me the
day of October 28th!
At night a group of deputies, senators, and political
men of Milan, the best-known and most responsible fig­
ures of the Lombard parliamentary world—among
whom were senators Conti, Crespi and the deputy De
Capitani—came to the offices of the Popolo d’ltalia to
ask me to desist from a struggle which they asserted
would be the beginning of a violent, grave and reprehen­
sible civil war. They proposed to me a sort of armistice

180

My Autobiography

and a truce with the central government. Perhaps a
ministerial crisis might save, they said, the situation and
the country.
I smiled back at the parliamentarians because of their
innocence. I answered them in words like these:
“Dear sirs, there is not the slightest question of any
partial or total crisis or of substitution of one ministry
for another. The game I have undertaken has a wider
and more serious character. For three years we have
lived in a caldron boiling with small battles and devas­
tations. This time I will not lay down weapons until a
full victory is concluded. It is time to change the di­
rection not only of the government, but also of the
whole of Italian life. There is no question of a strug­
gle of parties in parliament, but here is a question—
we want to know if we Italians are able to live an au­
tonomous life or are to be slaves of our own weakness,
not only toward foreign nations, but also in our own
affairs? War is declared! We will carry it to the bitter
end. Do you see these communications? Well, the strug­
gle is blazing all over Italy. Youth is in arms. I am
rated as a leader who precedes and not one who follows.
I will not humiliate with arbitration this page of the
marvellous resurrection of Italian youth. I tell you that
it is the last chapter. It will fulfil the traditions of our
country. It cannot die in a compromise.”
I then showed my visitors a letter, which I had re­
ceived at dawn from Commander Gabriele d’Annunzio. I had sent a brief message to the redeemer of Fiume,
who had been with us since the first moments of the

Thus We Took Rome

181

darkest struggle. It was brought to him by the Generals
Giampietro and Douhet, and Eugenio Coselschi. D’An­
nunzio, toward whom some vague hopes of the poli­
ticians had vainly turned, had immediately answered in
these terms:
“Dear Mussolini :

“I received to-night the three messengers, after a hard day
of work.
“In this book, so many times interrupted, are gathered the
truths that the one-eyed man discovers in retirement and
meditation. I think that Italian youth must now recognize
them and follow them with purified heart.
“It is necessary to gather together all the sincere forces
and start them toward the great goals that are fixed for
Italy by her eternal destinies.
“From virile patience and not from restless impatience
will salvation come to us.
“The messengers will tell you my thoughts and my inten­
tions, free from all vague colorings.
“The King knows that I am still the most faithful and
eager soldier of Italy.
“Let him stand against the adverse destinies, which must
be faced and defeated.
“Victory has the light eyes of Pallas.
“Do not blindfold her.
“Sine strage vincit,
“Strepitu
sine ullo.
„
r
Gabriele d Annunzio.

After having read the letter of D’Annunzio to these
Lombard politicians I sent them away with the declara­
tion that if I was left with only one man, or indeed all
alone, I would not abandon the fight until I had ob­
tained the final decisive ends as I had outlined them to
my associates.

182

My Autobiography

The logical clearness, the stout, rigorous, coherent
reasons I had given impressed those who had come to
offer conciliation, compromise, concessions.
I think that one of them must have immediately sped
off to inform the premier, Facta, that nothing could be
done with me.
Poor Facta, instead of being preoccupied with his
shortcomings, was wondering how and to whom he could
announce this real crisis among the sham crises. The
chamber was closed at that time. Where eould he turn?
Any one can see that in all events, even in solemn
events, the grotesque and the ludicrous are always to be
found, and sometimes prosper under the very shadow of
great and tragic happenings.
The last of the Liberal governments of Italy wanted
to make its final gesture. It addressed to the country a
declaration phrased in the following terms:
“Seditious manifestations are appearing in some of the
Italian provinces, brought about in such a way as to ham­
per the normal functioning of the powers of the State, and
are of such nature as to throw the Country into serious
trouble.
“The Government has tried its utmost to reach an agree­
ment, with the hope of bringing back peace to all minds and
to assure a peaceful solution of the crisis. Facing, however,
a revolutionary attempt, it has the duty of maintaining pub­
lic order by any means and at any price. Even though its
resignations have been presented, it will fulfil this duty for
the safety of citizens and the safety of free constitutional
institutions.
“Meanwhile the citizens must maintain their calm and

Thus We Took Rome

183

must have faith in the measures of public security that have
been adopted.
“Long live Italy! Long live the King!”
“Signed:
dei,

DeVito,

Facta,

Schanzer,

Alessio,
Anile,

Bertone,
Riccio,

Amendola,

Tad-

Paratore,

Soleri,

Bertini,

ltossi,

Dello Sbarba, Fulci, Luciani.”

At the same time the ministers, considering the sit­
uation created in the country, put their portfolios at
the disposition of the president of the council, Facta.
This man sought advice from several friends in Rome.
As a result he offered a decree to proclaim martial law,
which the King, in his profound wisdom, flatly refused
to sign.
The Sovereign understood that the revolution of the
black shirts was the conclusion of three years of strug­
gle and of fighting; he understood that only with the
victory of one party could we reach pacification and
that order and progress in civil life which are essential
to the harmony of the Italian people.
Out of respect for the most orthodox constitutional
forms, the King allowed Facta to follow the rules of
the Constitution. We had then resignations, designa­
tions, consultations, communications, charges, and so
on and so on. At this moment came a sinister maneuvre
that impressed me as being ominous. The National
party of the right, which had a great similarity of out­
look with the Fascisti, although it had not the same sys­
tem of campaign, advanced some singular claims by
means of emissaries.
The National right asserted in fact that it was the

184

My Autobiography

keystone of the situation. Salandra, who was the most
typical representative of the group, was disposed to sac­
rifice himself and to take upon his back the cross of
power. This was to be understood as an aid for the Fas­
cisti. I protested energetically against such a solution,
which would have perpetuated compromise and error.
Fascism was under arms, it was dominating the centres
of national life, it had a very well-defined aim, it had
followed deliberately an extra-parliamentary path and
it could not allow its victory to be mutilated or adul­
terated in such a manner. That was my exact answer
to the mediators of the union between the National
right and Fascism. No compromise 1
The struggle continued with the objectives I had
mapped out. It is impossible in the pages of an auto­
biography to present the entire picture of the revolu­
tionary events in those days. I distinctly remember that
with every hour that passed I had more poignantly the
sensation of triumphantly dominating the Italian polit­
ical situation. The adversaries were confused, scattered,
speechless. The Fascisti in compact files were already
near the gates of Rome and were expecting me to go to
the head of their military formations to march with
them into the Capital.
On the afternoon of the 29th I received a very urgent
telephone call from Rome on behalf of the Quirinal.
General Cittadini, first aide-de-camp of His Majesty
the King, asked me very kindly to go to Rome because
the King, having examined the situation, wanted to
charge me with forming a ministry. I thanked General

Thus We Took Rome

185

Cittadini for his kindness, but I asked him to give me
the same communication by telegram. One knows that
the telephone may play dirty tricks at times. General
Cittadini, after having first objected that iny request
was not usual under the Court regulations, took into
consideration the abnormal and informal situation, and
agreed to send me the same invitation by telegram. In
fact after a few hours an urgent message arrived. It
was of a personal character.
This was it:
“On. Mussolini, Milan,
“His Majesty the King asks you to come immediately to
Rome for he wishes to offer you the responsibility of forming
a Ministry.J With respect,
~
„
1
“General

Cittadini.”

This was not yet victory, but the progress made was
considerable. I communicated directly with the head­
quarters of the revolution in Perugia and with the vari­
ous commands of the black shirts in Milan. I gave out,
by means of an extra edition of the Popolo d’ltalia, the
news of the command I had received.
I was in a terrible state of nervous tension. Night
after night I had been kept awake, giving orders, fol­
lowing the compact columns of the Fascisti, restricting
the battle to the knightly practices of Fascism.
A period of greater responsibilities was about to be­
gin for me; I must not fail in my duty or in my aims.
I gathered all my strength to my aid, I invoked the
memory of the dead, I asked the assistance of God, I

186

My Autobiography

called upon the faithful living to assist me in the great
task that confronted me.
That night of October 31st, 1922, I left the direction
of the Popolo d’Italia and turned my fighting journal
over to my brother, Arnaldo. In the number of Novem­
ber 1st I published the following declaration:
“From now on the direction of the Popolo d’ltalia is in­
trusted to Arnaldo Mussolini.
“I thank and salute with brotherly love all the editors,
collaborators, correspondents, employees, workers, all those
who have assiduously and faithfully labored with me for the
life of this paper and for love of our Country.
“Rome, October 30tli, 1922.
,,
“Mussolini.”

I parted with regret from the paper that had been
the most constant and potent factor in our victory. I
must add that my brother, Arnaldo, has been able to
maintain the editorship with dignity and capacity.
When I had intrusted the paper to my brother I was
off for Rome. To the zealous people who wanted to get
me a special train to go to Rome to confer with the
King, I said that for me a compartment in the usual
train was quite enough. Engines and coal should not be
wasted. Economize! That is the first and acid test of a
true man of government. And after all I could only
enter Rome at the head of my black shirts, then camp­
ing at Santa Marinella in the atmosphere and the shin­
ing rays of the Capital.
The news of my departure sped all over Italy. In
every station where the train stopped I found a gath­
ering of the Fascisti and of the masses who wanted to

Thus We Took Rome

187

bring me, even through the pouring rain, their cheers
and their good-will.
Leaving Milan was painful. That city had given me
a home for ten years; to me it had been prodigal in the
satisfaction it had afforded; it had supported me in
every stress; it had baptized the most wonderful squads
of action of Fascism; it had been the scene of historical
political struggles. Now I was leaving it, called by des­
tiny and by a greater task. All Milan knew of my go­
ing, and I felt that even in the feeling of joy for a de­
parture that was a symbol of victory, there was also a
shade of sadness.
But this was not the hour for sentimentality. It was
the time for quick, sure decisions. After the kisses and
farewells of my family I said good-by to many promi­
nent Milanese, and then I went away, speeding into the
night, to take counsel with myself, to refresh my soul,
to listen to the echoes of voices of friends and to en­
visage the wide horizons of to-morrow’s possibilities.
The minor episodes of that trip and of those days are
not important. The train brought me into the midst of
the Fascisti; I was in view of Rome at Santa Marinella. I reviewed the columns. I established the formali­
ties for the entrance into Rome. I established connec­
tions between the quadrumvirate and the authorities.
My presence redoubled the great enthusiasm. I read
in the eyes of those young men the divine smile of tri­
umph of an ideal. With such support I would have felt
inspired to challenge, if need be, not only the base Ital­
ian ruling class, but enemies of any sort and race.

188

My Autobiography

In Rome an indescribable welcome awaited me. I did
not want any delay. Even before making contacts with
my political friends I motored to the Quirinal. I wore
a black shirt. I was introduced without formalities into
the presence of His Majesty the King. The Stefani
agency and the great newspapers of the world gave
stilted or speculative details about this interview. I will
limit myself, for obvious reasons of reserve, to declare
that the conference was characterized by great cordial­
ity. I concealed no plans, nor did I fail to make plain
my ideas of how to rule Italy. I obtained the Sovereign’s
approbation. I took up lodgings at the Savoy Hotel and
began to work. First I made arrangements with the gen­
eral command of the army to bring militia into Rome
and to have them defile in proper formation in a review
before the King. I gave detailed and precise orders.
One hundred thousand black shirts paraded in perfect
order before the Sovereign. They brought to him the
homage of Fascist Italy!
I was then triumphant and in Rome! I killed at once
all unnecessary demonstrations in my honor. I gave or­
ders that not a single parade should take place without
the permission of the General Fascist Command. It was
necessary to give to everybody from the first moment a
stern and rigid sense of discipline in line with the regime
that I had conceived.
I discouraged every manifestation on the part of
army officers who wanted to bring me their plaudits.
I have always considered the army outside and above
every kind of politics. The army must, in my opinion,

From a photograph bp Strazza.

King Victor Emmanuel III and Mussolini.

Thus We Took Rome

189

be inspired by absolute and conscientious discipline; it
must devote itself, with the deepest will, only to the de­
fense of frontiers and of historical rights. The army is
an institution which must be preserved inviolate. It must
not suffer the slightest loss in its integrity and in its
high dedication.
But other and more complex problems surged about
me at that moment. I was in Rome not only with the
duty of composing a new ministry; I had also firmly
decided to renew and rebuild from the very bottom the
life of the Italian people. I vowed to myself that I would
impel it toward higher and more brilliant aims.
Rome sharpened my sense of dedication. The Eter­
nal City, “caput mundi,” has two Courts and two Di­
plomacies. It has seen in the course of centuries imperial
armies defeated under its walls. It has witnessed the
decay of the strong, and the rise of universal waves of
civilization and of thought. Rome, the coveted goal of
princes and leaders, the universal city, heir to the old
Empire and the power of Christianity! Rome welcomed
me as leader of national legions, as a representative,
not of a party or a group, but of a great faith and of an
entire people.
I had long meditated my action as a man of party
and as a man of government. I had carried these
thoughts as I walked by day and even as I slept by
night. I had won and could win more. I could have
nailed my enemies to the wall, not only metaphorically
but in very fact if I had wished—those enemies who had
slandered Fascism and those whom I hated for having

190

My Autobiography

betrayed Italy in peace as they had betrayed her in
war.
The atmosphere was pregnant with the possibility of
tragedy. I had mobilized three hundred thousand black
shirts. They were waiting for my signal to move. They
could be used for one purpose or another. I had in the
Capital sixty thousand armed men ready for action.
The March on Rome could have set tragic fires. It
might have spilled much blood if it had followed the
example of ancient ard modern revolutions. This was
for me a moment in which it was more necessary than
ever to examine the field with calm serenity and with
cold reason to compare the immediate and the distant
results of our daring action when directed toward
definite aims.
I could have proclaimed a dictatorship, I could have
formed a dictatorial ministry composed solely of Fas­
cisti on the type of the Directory that was formed in
France at the time of the Convention. The Fascist revo­
lution, however, had its unique characteristics; it had no
antecedent in history. It was different from any other
revolution also in its capacity to re-enter, with deliberaate intent, legal, established traditions and forms. For
that reason also, I knew that the mobilization should
last the shortest possible time.
I did not forget that I had a parliament on my hands;
a chamber of deputies of sullen mind, ready to lay
traps for me, accustomed to an old tradition of ambi­
guity and intrigue, full of grudges, repressed only by
fear; a dismayed senate from which I could obtain a

Thus Wc Took Rome

191

disciplined respect but not an eager and productive
collaboration. The Crown was looking on to see what I
would do, following constitutional rules.
The Pontificate followed the events with anxiety.
The other nations looked at the revolution suspiciously
if not with hostility. Foreign banks were anxious for
news. Exchange wavered, credit was still vacillating,
waiting for the situation to be cleared. It was indispen­
sable first of all to give the impression of stability to the
new regime.
I had to see, oversee and foresee everything. I slept
not at all for some nights, but they were nights fecund
in action and ideas. The measures that immediately fol­
lowed in the first twenty-four hours of my government
bear witness.
Another problem arose from the character of the
revolution. Every revolution has in it, besides the great
mass of human impact and the conscientious and un­
selfish leaders, two other types—adventurers and melan­
cholic intellectuals who might be called, by a synthetic
expression, ascetics of revolution. When the revolution
is over, the mass, which often is moved by the simple in­
tuition of a great historical and social reality, goes
peacefully back to its usual activities. It forms the la­
borious and disciplined leaven of the new regime. The
conscientious and unselfish leaders form the necessary
aristocracy of rulers. But the ascetics and the adven­
turers are a dead burden. The first would like to see
overnight a perfect humanity, without faults. They do
not understand that there is no revolution that can

192

My Autobiography

change the nature of men. Because of their Utopian
illusions the ascetics are never contented; they waste
their time and other men’s energies in sophistry and
doubts just when it is necessary to work like fiends in
order to go forward. The adventurers always identify
the fortune of the revolution with their own fortune;
they hope to gain personal advantage from the victory
and they harbor resentment when their wishes are not
satisfied, and clamor for extreme and dangerous mea­
sures.
Now I had to defend the Fascist victory from the
ascetics and the adventurers. The adventurers, however,
sank rapidly in the Fascist revolution, because it was
different and on a higher plane than any other revo­
lution.
But I felt it my constant duty to examine and to pon­
der, in such a grave moment, every step I made.
First of all in the pressure of events, 1 desired to as­
sure regularity to the country and to constitute a new
government. Order came quickly. There were only a
few sporadic incidents of violence, inevitable under such
conditions. I felt the necessity of safeguarding Facta,
and I called ten black shirts who had each been much
decorated for bravery for the purpose of accompany­
ing Facta to Pinerolo, his native town, under their word
of honor. They kept their promise. “Nobody”—that
was the order—“should touch a hair, mock or humiliate
Facta.” He had given to the country his only son, who
died in an airplane accident during the war. and Facta
deserved respect for that and more.

Thus We Took Rome

193

I forbade reprisals against the leaders of the opposi­
tions. It was only by my great authority that I averted
the destruction, not only rhetorical hut also actual, of
my most rabid enemies. I saved their skins for them. At
the same time, in the space of a few hours, I consti­
tuted a new ministry. I discarded, as I said, the idea of
a Fascist dictatorship, because I wanted to give to the
country the impression of a normal life free from the
selfish exclusiveness of a party. That sense of instinct
for equilibrium accompanies me fortunately in the
gravest, the most strenuous, and the most critical mo­
ments. I decided then, after having weighed everything,
to compose a ministry of a nationalist character.
I have had the feeling, as I had then, that later there
would become inevitable a process of clarification; but
I preferred that it should come forth spontaneously
from the succeeding political events.
But that was the last generous gesture that I ever
made toward the old Italian ring of parties and poli­
ticians.
In the new ministry, among ministers and under­
secretaries of state, were fifteen Fascisti, three Nation­
alists, three Liberals of the right, six “Popolari” and
three Social Democrats. I was generous toward the Lib­
erals of the right, whose peculiar maneuvre in order to
pick up for their profit the results of the Fascist revo­
lution had been quite recent. Among the “Popolari” and
Social Democrats I selected those who gave promise of
national spirit and who did not intrigue with subversive
popularism or with socialism.

194

My Autobiography

I kept for myself, with the Presidency of the Coun­
cil, the office of the Interior and assumed ad interim
that of Foreign Affairs. I gave to Armando Diaz the
Ministry of War and I promised to give him an army
worthy of the country and the victor of Vittorio Veneto. I called Admiral Thaon de Revel for the Navy
and Federzoni for the Colonies.
The complete formation of the ministry was as fol­
lows:
Benito Mussolini, Deputy, Presidency of the Council,
Domestic and '‘'‘interim" of Foreign Affairs (Fas­
cist) .
Armando Diaz, General of the Army, War.
Paolo Thaon de ltcvel, Admiral, Senator, Navy.
Luigi Federzoni, Deputy, Colonies (Nationalist).
Aldo Oviglio, Deputy, Justice (Fascist).
Alberto De Stefani, Deputy, Finances (Fascist).
Vincenzo Tangorra, Deputy, Treasury (“Popolare”).
Giovanni Gentile, Professor, Public Instruction (Liberal
of the Right).
Gabriello Carnazza, Deputy, Public Works (Democrat).
Giuseppe DeCapitani, Deputy, Agriculture (Liberal of
the Right).
Teofilo Rossi, Senator, Industry and Commerce (Demo­
crat) .
Stefano Cavazzoni, Deputy, Work and Social Providence
(“Popolare”).
Giovanni Colonna di Cesaro’, Deputy, Posts and Tele­
graphs (Social Democrat).
Giovanni Giuriati, Deputy, Liberated Provinces (Fas­
cist) .
Under Secretaries of State
Presidency: Giacomo Acerbo, Deputy (Fascist).
Domestic: Aldo Finzi, Deputy (Fascist).

Thus We Took Rome

195

Foreign: Ernesto Vassallo, Deputy (“Popolare”).
War: Carlo Bonardi, Deputy (Social Democrat).
Navy: Costanzo Ciano, Deputy (Fascist). With the Commisariat of Commercial Marine.
Treasury: Alfredo Rocco, Deputy (Nationalist).
Military Assistance: Cesare Maria De Vecchi, Deputy
(Fascist).
Finances: Pietro Lissia, Deputy (Social Democrat).
Colonies: Giovanni Marchi, Deputy (Liberal of the
Right).
Liberated Provinces: Umberto Merlin, Deputy (“Popolare”).
Justice: Fulvio Milani, Deputy (“Popolare”).
Instruction: Dario Lupi, Deputy (Fascist).
Fine Arts: Luigi Siciliani, Deputy (Nationalist).
Agriculture: Ottavio Corgini, Deputy (Fascist).
Public Works: Alessandro Sardi, Deputy (Fascist).
Post and Telegraph: Michele Terzaghi, Deputy (Fas­
cist) .
Industry and Commerce: Gronchi Giovanni, Deputy
(“Popolare”).
Labor and Social Providence: Silvio Gai, Deputy (Fas­
cist) .
When the ministry was completed I wrote the fol­
lowing paper of demobilization, signed by the quadrum­
virate :
“Fascisti of all Italy!
“Our movement has been rewarded by Victory. The leader
of our party has assumed the political powers of the State,
both for domestic and for foreign affairs. Our Government,
while it consecrates our triumph with the names of those who
were its creators on land and sea, assembles, with the pur­
pose of national pacification, men from the other parties,
because they are attached to the cause of the Nation.

196

My Autobiography

“The Italian Fascism is too intelligent to desire a greater
victory.
“Fascisti!
“The supreme quadrumvirate of action, turning back its
powers to the direction of the party, salutes you for your
marvellous proof of courage and discipline. You have shown
your merit in the future of the country.
“Disperse in the same perfect order in which you gath­
ered for the great trial, destined—we firmly believe—to open
a new epoch in Italian history. Go back to your usual work,
because Italy now needs to work peacefully to reach its bet­
ter day.
“Nothing must trouble the powerful stride of the Victory
that we won in these days of proud passion and sovereign
magnitude.
“Long live Italy. Long live Fascism!
“The Quadrumvirate.”

Then I sent a telegram to D’Annunzio and I dis­
tributed an energetic circular to all the Prefects of the
Kingdom and to the lesser authorities. The telegram to
D’Annunzio said:
“Assuming the hard task of giving discipline and internal
peace to the Nation, I send to you, Commander, my affec­
tionate greetings for you and for the destinies of the coun­
try. The valiant Fascist youth which gives back a soul to
the Nation will not blindfold Victory. Mussolini.”
The text of the circular sent to office-holders was the
following:
“From to-day, intrusted with the confidence of His Maj­
esty the King, I undertake the direction of the Government
of the Country. I demand that all authorities, from the

Thus We Took Rome

197

highest to the least, discharge their duties with intelligence
and with complete regard for the supreme interests of the
Country.
“I will set the example.
“The President of the Council and Ministry of the In­
terior. Signed: Mussolini.”
Finally I announced for November the 16th a meet­
ing of the chamber of deputies, to render an account
of what I had done, and to announce my intentions and
programme.
It was an exceptional meeting. The hall was filled
to overflowing. Every deputy was present. My decla­
rations were brief, clear, energetic. I left no misunder­
standing. I stated sharply the rights of revolution. I
called the attention of the audience to the fact that only
by the will of Fascism had the revolution remained
within the boundaries of legality and tolerance.
“I could have made,” I said, “of this dull and gray
hall a bivouac for corpses. I could have nailed up the
doors of parliament and have established an exclusively
Fascist government. I could have done those things,
but—at least for a time—I did not do them.”
I then thanked all my collaborators and pointed with
sympathy to the multitude of Italian laborers who had
aided the Fascist movement with their active or pas­
sive solidarity.
I did not present one of the usual programmes that
the past ministries used to present; for these solved the
problems of the country only on paper. I asserted my
will to act and to act without delaying for useless ora­

198

My Autobiography

tory. In the field of foreign politics I squarely declared
the intention of following a “policy of dignity and na­
tional utility.”
On every subject I made weighty declarations that
showed how Fascism had already been able to assay and
analyze and solve varying and urgent problems, and to
fix the future outlines of government. Finally I con­
cluded :
“Gentlemen:
“From further communications you will know the Fascist
programme in its details. I do not want, so long as I can
avoid it, to rule against the Chamber; but the Chamber must
feel its own position. That position opens the possibility
that it may be dissolved in two days or in two years. We ask
full powers because we want to assume f u l l responsibility.
Without full powers you know very well that we couldn’t
save one lira—I say one lira. We do not want to exclude the
possibility of voluntary co-operation, for we will cordially
accept it, if it comes from deputies, senators, or even from
competent private citizens. Every one of us has a religious
sense of our difficult task. The Country cheers us and waits.
We will give it not words but facts. We formally and sol­
emnly promise to restore the budget to health. And we will
restore it. We want to make a foreign policy of peace, but
at the same time one of dignity and steadiness. We will do
it. We intend to give the Nation a discipline. We will give
it. Let none of our enemies of yesterday, of to-day, of to­
morrow cherish illusions in regard to our permanence in
power. Foolish and childish illusions, like those of yesterday!
“Our Government has a formidable foundation in the con­
science of the Nation. It is supported by the best, the newest
Italian generations. There is no doubt that in these last
years a great step toward the unification of spirit has been
made. The Fatherland has again found itself bound to­
gether from north to south, from the continent to the gen­

Thus We Took Rome

199

erous islands, which will never he forgotten, from the
metropolis of the active colonies of the Mediterranean and
the Atlantic Ocean. Do not, Gentlemen, address more vain
words to the Nation. Fifty-two applications to speak upon
my message to Parliament are too many. Let us, instead
of talking, work with pure heart and ready mind to assure
the prosperity and the greatness of the Country.
“May God assist me in bringing to a triumphant end my
hard labor.”
I do not believe that, since 1870, the hall of Montecitoro had heard energetic and clear words. They burned
with a passion deep in my being. In that speech there
was the essence of my old and my recent wrestling with
my own mind and my own soul. More than one deputy
had to repress the rancour generated by my deserved
reproaches; but my exposition in parliament was re­
warded by the approval of the whole of Italy. I was
looking beyond that old hall of parties of petty power
and of politicians. I was speaking to the entire nation.
It listened to me and it understood me 1
My political instinct told me that from that moment
there would rise, with increasing truth and with increas­
ing expansion of Fascist activity, the dawn of new his­
tory for Italy.
And perhaps dawn on a new path of civilization. . . .

CHAPTER X

FIVE YEARS OF GOVERNMENT

Y revolutionary method and the power of the
Black Shirts had brought me to tremendous
responsibility of power. My task, as I have
pointed out, was neither simple nor easy; it required
large vision, it gathered to it continually more and more
duties.
An existence wholly new began for me. To speak
about it makes it necessary for me to abandon the usual
form of autobiographic style; I must consider the or­
ganic whole of my governmental activity. From now on
my life identifies itself almost exclusively with thou­
sands of acts of government. Individuality disappears.
Instead, my person expresses, I sometimes feel, only
measures and acts of concrete character; these do not
concern a single person; they concern the multitudes,
they concern and permeate an entire people. So one’s
entire life is lost in the whole.
Certainly I know that I took the direction of the
government when the central power of the state was
sinking to the bottom. We had a financial situation that
Peano of the Liberal party had summarized with an
astounding figure: six billions of deficit! Individually
the people fed on expedients. Progressive inflation and

M

200

Five Years of Government 201
the printing presses gave to everybody the old illusion
of prosperity. It created an unstable delusion of well­
being; it excited a fictitious game of interests. All this
had to be expiated when faced by the severe Fascist
financial policy.
Abroad our political reputation had diminished pro­
gressively. We were judged as a nation without order
and discipline, unable either to prosper or produce. The
chronic infection of disorder had withdrawn from us the
sympathies of countries better equipped than we were.
Worse yet, it had increased the haughtiness and the con­
tempt of many of our enemies.
The Italian school system, in its complex formation,
university, middle and lower schools, had turned its
energies into purely abstract, theoretical functions; it
had withdrawn more and more from a real world, a
modern world, and from the fundamental problems of
national life; it had been inert as a guide to civil duties.
Schools and pulpits should always show the way to as­
cending peoples.
There still lived, in the national mechanism, strange
and hateful regional political formations; these used to
bring our solidarity into question, if not into peril.
The activities of the government in terms of services,
improvements and appropriations were guided and af­
fected, not by real natural necessities, but by the desire
to ingratiate this or that population, or region. The trea­
sury was tapped by this base policy of politics—electoral
strategy.
A bureaucracy already suffering from elephantiasis

202

My Autobiography

increased its distention, generating that spirit of trouble,
those characters of instability, of intolerance, of slight
love of duty, which are typical of all great accumula­
tions of functionaries, especially when the latter are not
well paid, and do not see their moral prestige supported
and built up by the authority of the state and by pre­
cise and clear definition of individual responsibility.
We still had, as a consequence of our generous strug­
gle, the Fascist squadron formations. They might be­
come, in the new conditions of life, a danger threatening
public order and legality.
The army and the navy lived apart from the great
problems of national life. As a matter of fact, though
this is good in many respects, it is not good when they
are set aside in an almost humiliated formation. Avia­
tion was in disorder. It was difficult to give it new
strength. One must not forget, when considering avia­
tion, that Nitti had forbidden flight, not only for mili­
tary planes, but also for private planes. II is command
was to demobilize aviation, and to sell the motors as
well as the airplanes. It was a kind of premeditated
murder of a nation which really did not want to be
strangled.
In the meantime there assembled in Rome all the
arms and legs of anti-Fascism, in all its gradations. The
political parties, at first dismayed by the revolution of
the Black Shirts and my advent to power, began to re­
vive. They began to find courage to pursue again the
general trend of political parties in the equivocal at­
mosphere of the parliamentary corridors at Montecito-

Five Years of Government 203
rio. The Italian press was, for the greater part, tied to
old groups and to old political customers.
It was necessary to reorganize all civil life, without
forgetting the basic need of a supervisory force. It was
necessary to give order to political economy, to the
schools, to our military strength. It was necessary to
abolish double functions, to reduce bureaucracy, to im­
prove public services. It was necessary to check the
corrosion and erosion of criticism by the remnants of
the old political parties. I had to fight external at­
tacks. I had to refine and improve Fascism. I had to
divide and floor the enemies. I saw the vision that I must
in every respect work to improve and to give tone to all
the manners and customs of Italian political life.
It was also imperative not to neglect the ten millions
of Italians emigrated beyond the frontiers. We had to
give faith again to the zones on our borders. We had to
assist in bringing modern improvements and stimuli to
the life of the southern regions, and to get in touch with
all the men of the healthy and strong provinces, wher­
ever they were.
Infinite then were the problems and the worries. I
had to decide everything, and I had a will firm enough
to summon up all the political postulates that I had
enunciated and sustained with pen and paper, in meet­
ings and in my parliamentary speeches. This was not
ordy a problem of strength to last, to endure, to stand
erect in any wind, but also, above all, a problem of will.
I abandoned everything that kept me tied to the for­
tunes of my newspapers; I parted from everything that

204

My Autobiography

could have the slightest personal character. I devoted
myself wholly, completely, exclusively, to the work of
reconstruction.
To-day there is no change. I want to be a simple, de­
voted servant of the state; chief of a party, but, first,
worthy head of a strong government. I abandoned with­
out regret all the superfluous comforts of life. I made
an exception only of sports which, while making my
body alert and ready, succeed in creating healthy and
happy intervals in my complex life of work. In these
six years—with the exception of official dinners—I have
never passed the threshold of an aristocrat’s salon, or of
a cafe. I have also almost entirely abandoned the thea­
tre, which once took away from me useful hours of
evening work.
I love all sports; I drive a motor car with confidence;
I have done tours at great speed, amazing not only to
my friends, but also to old and experienced drivers. I
love the airplane; I have flown countless times.
Even when I was kept busy by the cares of power, I
needed only a few lessons to obtain a pilot’s license. I
once fell from a height of fifty metres, but that did not
stop my flying. Motors give me a new and great sensa­
tion of strength. A horseback ride on a magnificent sor­
rel is also for me a joyous interruption, and fencing, to
which I devote myself, often with remarkable physical
benefit, gives me the greatest satisfaction. I ask of my
violin nothing more than serene hours of music. Of the
great poets, such as Dante, of the supreme philosophers,
such as Plato, I often ask hours of poetry, hours of
meditation.

Mussolini walking along the seashore, May 1, 1928.
From a photograph presented to Mr. Richard Washburn Child.

Five Years of Government 205
No other amusement interests me. I do not drink, I
do not smoke, and I am not interested in cards or
games. I pity those who lose time, money, and some­
times all of life itself in the frenzy of games.
As for the love of the table; I don’t appreciate it.
I do not feel it. Especially in these last years my meals
are as frugal as those of a pauper. In every hour of my
life, it is the spiritual element which leads me on. Money
has no lure for me. The only things at which I aim are
those which identify themselves with the greatest ob­
jects of life and civilization, with the highest interests,
and the real and deep aspirations of my country. I am
sure of my strength and my faith; for that reason I do
not indulge in any concession or any compromise. I
leave, without a look over my shoulder, my foes and
those who cannot overtake me. I leave them with their
political dreams. I leave them to their strength for ora­
torical and demagogic exertion.
Italy needed what? An avenger! Her political and
spiritual resurrection needed a worthy interpreter. It
was necessary to cauterize the virulent wounds, to have
strength, and to be able to go against the current. It
was necessary to eliminate evils which threatened to be­
come chronic. It was necessary to curb political dissolu­
tion. I had to bring to the blood stream of national life
a new, serene and powerful lymph of the Italian people.
Voting was reduced to a childish game; it had already
humiliated the nation for entire decades. It had cre­
ated a perilous structure far below the heights of the
duties of any new Italy. I faced numberless enemies. I

206

My Autobiography

created new ones—I had few illusions about that I The
struggle, in my opinion, had to have a final character:
it had to be fought as a whole over the most diverse
fields of action.
To express this character of completeness of the whole
struggle, I must be able to set it forth in a clear, evi­
dent way; it is necessary for me to set forth in sub­
divisions the different fields in which action was de­
manded of me and out of which evolved the most sig­
nificant facts of my governmental life. Deeds and ac­
tions, more than any useless subjective expressions,
write my true autobiography—from 1922 till 1927.
I never had any interval of uncertainty; fortunately,
I never knew those discouragements or those exaltations
which often are harmful to the effectiveness of a states­
man. I understood that not only my prestige was at
stake, but the prestige, the very name of the country
which I love more than myself, more than anything else.
I was anxious to improve, refine and co-ordinate the
character of the Italians. Let me state what my domes­
tic policies have been, what was charted and what was
achieved. From petty discords and quarrels of holiday
and Sunday frequency, from many-colored political par­
tisanships, from peasant strifes, from bloody struggles,
from the insincerity and duplicity of the press; from
parliamentary battles and maneuvres, from the vicissi­
tudes of representative lobbies, from hateful and useless
debates and snarling talk, we finally climbed up to the
plane of a unified nation, to a powerful harmony—domi­
nated, inspired and spiritualised by Fascism. That is not
my judgment, but that of the world.

Five Years of Government 207
After my speech of November 10th, 1922, in the
chamber of deputies, I obtained approval for my dec­
laration by 306 votes against 116. I asked and without
difficulty obtained full powers.
I issued a decree of amnesty which created an atmos­
phere of peace. I had to solve the problem of our armed
Fascist squadrons. I always have had great influence
with my soldiers and with the action squads, which in
every part of Italy had given proof of their valor, their
gallantry, and their passionate faith. But now that Fas­
cism had reached power, these formations were, in such
a situation, no longer desirable.
On the other hand, I could not suddenly wipe out or
simply direct toward the fields of sport these groups of
men who had for me a deep, blind, and absolute devo­
tion. In their instinct, in their vibrant conviction, they
were led not only by strength and courage, but by a
sense of political virtue. And as the perils had not en­
tirely disappeared, it was imperative to guard the cita­
del of the Black Shirt’s triumph. I decided then to cre­
ate a Voluntary Militia for National Security and
Defence. Of course its duties had to be well defined. It
must be commanded by seasoned veterans and chiefs
who, after having fought the war, had known and ex­
perienced the struggles of the Fascist resurrection.
I proclaimed that with Fascism at the wheel every­
thing illegal and disorderly must disappear. The de­
cision to transform the squads of action to Voluntary
Militia for National Security undoubtedly was one of
political wisdom; it conferred on the regime not only
authority, but also a great reserve strength.

208

My Autobiography

The organization of the Grand Council, a body ex­
quisitely political, was one of my major aims after my
coming to power. I faced the necessity of creating a
political organization typically Fascist, one which would
be outside and above the various old political mecha­
nisms dominating and misruling our national life. Every
day I needed clear answers to questions arising—I
needed a body of reference. In all my complex work as
chief of the government, I could not forget that I was
also chief of the party that for three years had fought
in the squares and streets of Italy—not merely to gain
power, but above all to meet the supreme task and the
supreme necessity of infusing a new spirit into the
nation.
The Grand Council had to be the propelling element
of Fascism, with the hard and delicate task of prepar­
ing and transforming into legal enactments the work
of the Fascist revolution. There were no—and there are
none now—heterogeneous elements in the Grand Coun­
cil, but virile Fascists, ministers, representatives of our
deepest currents of public opinion, men of expert knowl­
edge and of interests. The Grand Council has always
succeeded. I preside over it, and let me add, as a detail,
that all the motions and the official reports which have
appeared in the papers in concise form, have been writ­
ten by my hand. They are the product of long medita­
tions in which Italian life and the position of Italy in
the world have been examined and dissected by the Fas­
cist soul, spirit and faith. The Grand Council, which to­
day I want framed in the legislative institutions of the

Five Years of Government 209
regime, has rendered in its first five years a magnifi­
cent, unparallelled service.
One of the problems which presented itself first of
all was that of the unification of the police forces. We
had the ordinary police, with the different branches of
political and judiciary police; the Royal Carabinieri,
and, finally, the body of the Royal Guards. This last in­
stitution, created by Nitti, was made up of demobilized
elements and was a useless organization finding its place
somewhere between the carabinieri and the usual forces
of public security. I decided immediately to suppress
the Royal Guards. That suppression in the main was
not attended by unfortunate incidents. In some cities,
such as Torino and Milano, there were riots and at­
tempts at resistance. I gave severe orders. I called into
my office or telephoned to the chiefs responsible for cer­
tain local situations. I ordered them to fire, if neces­
sary. In six hours everything was calm again. The in­
stant dissolving of an armed body of forty thousand
men cost only four dead and some tens of wounded. The
officers were incorporated into other organizations, or
took up activities according to their own wishes; the
privates reached their districts and homes without fur­
ther trouble.
Our Italian form of political Masonry, which at first
had seemed to have adjusted itself to the new condi­
tions, submitting to the advent of Fascism to power,
now began a stupid and deceitful warfare against me
and against Fascism. In a meeting of the Grand Coun­
cil I proclaimed the impossibility for Fascisti of mem­

210

My Autobiography

bership at the same time in Masonry. As a leader of the
ranks of socialism I had already pursued the same antiMasonic policy. We must not forget that this shady
institution with its secret nature has always had in Italy
a character typical of the briber and blackmailer. It has
nothing of protection, humanitarianism, benevolence.
Every one, even those who were benefited, are con­
vinced that Italian Masonry has been nothing more than
a society for mutual aid and for reciprocal adulation of
its members. Every one knows that it has diffused in
every way a worship of self-interest, and methods of
privilege and intrigue, neglecting and despising rights
and prerogatives of intelligence and morality. My
struggle against Masonry was bitter; I carry the tan­
gible signs of it still, hut it constitutes for me, for my
sincerity, and my probity, one of the most precious
titles of merit.
In 1923, after negotiations carried on with unwaver­
ing constancy, I united Italian Nationalism with Fas­
cism. For a certain time an identical vision had been
shared by these two organizations about everything
concerning the ends and aims of our national life. Po­
litical developments, however, had led them along sepa­
rate paths. Now that victory had been concluded and
the better elements of Nationalism were already collabo­
rating with the new regime, the unification was more
than a wise move; it was also an act of political sincer­
ity. Black Shirt and Blue Shirt—the latter was the uni­
form of the Nationalists—united in a perfect accord of
chivalry and political loyalty. This new and deep unity

Five Years of Government 211
permitted us to enjoy the prospect of more favorable
auspices for a new future, one worthy of that great Italy
which had been prophesied, desired and finally created
by Nationalism and Fascism.
In April, 1923, in Turin, there assembled the na­
tional congress of the “Popular Party.” It was a ver­
bose and academic meeting, not very different from the
other political congresses that for decades had hypno­
tized Italian public life. They naturally discussed the
policies of the Fascist regime for a long while and,
after various divergencies of opinion, the majority of
those assembled voted in favor of a middle-ground po­
sition with an anti-Fascist leaning.
Among the members of my ministry there were some
of the “Popular Party”; they found themselves, after
the meeting, in a difficult and delicate situation. I nat­
urally put before them the problem of giving thought
to their opportunity of staying in the Fascist govern­
ment in the new state of things created by the attitude
of their party. There were some explanations. Differ­
ing opinions alternated, but, in order to initiate that
process of political clarification that I had foreseen as
inevitable, I advised the members of the government of
the Popular party to give up their places so that they
could avoid dissensions between their parliamentary
group and the Fascist party.
This process of clarification I had foreseen as soon as
I went into power. The climate and altitude of Fascism
was not adapted to all minds of that time. There were
still many dissenters. Many people fed on the illusory

212

My Autobiography

hope that they would be able to influence and bend the
methodical and straight courses laid out by Fascism.
For this purpose, I was approached by those who were
skilled in twistings, turnings and slidings. Naturally,
they always found me as resistant as flint.
In 1923, for the first time, our Labor Day passed
without incident; the people worked calmly, without re­
gretting that old date which now in Italy had lost every
meaning. Later on I wanted to get in touch with the
public opinion of Italy and to measure how deep Fas­
cism had penetrated the masses. First I went to Milan
and to Romagna. Afterward I went to Venice, Padua,
Vicenza, Sicily and Sardinia; finally I journeyed to
Piacenza and Florence. I found everywhere warm, vi­
brant enthusiasm, not only among my lieutenants and
the Black Shirts, but also among all of the Italian peo­
ple. That people finally was sensing that it had a gov­
ernment and a leader.
The Black Shirts, the makers of the revolution,
hailed me as a leader with the same changeless enthu­
siasm they had shown when I was only the chief of the
party and when I was developing that programme of
journalistic attack which had added so much to my
popularity. The Italian temperament at times is much
more adapted to faction than to action. But now my old
comrades were just as near to me in their daily tasks
and their regimental discipline. Their attitude not only
made me proud but moved me deeply. I could not ig­
nore this warm youth so full of ardor, and I was quite
decided not to sacrifice it to compromises with an old

Five Years of Government 213
world which was destined to disappear. The population
felt that it had recovered a real liberty; they had experi­
enced liberation from the continuous blackmail of parties
which deluded the masses. They blessed my political
work. And I was happy.
It was in this period that the campaign of the oppo­
sition opened again. Not being able to beat me on the
field of conciliation and compromise, the opposing ele­
ments, led by the Cornere della Sera, began a series
of depressing prophecies and calamity howling. They
launched deceitful attacks and spun their polemic webs.
I put into effect, however, a new electoral law, because
I did not want to fall into the pitfalls of our old propor­
tional representative system. I had alienated the “Populars,” the Democrats, and some of the Liberals. The re­
forming of the school, about which I will have more to
say, had invited some hostilities.
Meanwhile, we had anti-Fascist assaults and am­
bushes. This was a stormy year. It must be regarded as
a period of settling and one of difficulty. I had to guard
Fascism from internal crises, often provoked by intrigue
and trickery. I succeeded in this by being always inex­
orably opposed to those who thought they could create
disturbances and frictions in the party itself. Fascism
is a unit; it cannot have varying tendencies and trends,
as it cannot have two leaders on any one level of organ­
ization. There is a hierarchy; the foundation is the Black
Shirts and on the summit is the Chief, who is only one.
That is one of the first sources of my strength; all
the dissolutions of our political parties were always born

214

My Autobiography

not from ideal motives but from personal ambitions,
from false preconceptions or from corruption, or from
mysterious, oblique and hidden forces which I could al­
ways identify as the work of our Italian Masonry. I
took account of all this. I resolved not to yield a hair­
breadth. When the more urgent legislative problems had
been settled by parliament I decided to dissolve the
chamber, and after having obtained extension of full
powers, I announced elections for April 6th, 1924.
This signal for elections was sufficient to calm politi­
cal agitations of dubious character. All the parties be­
gan their stock-taking and the revision of their forces.
All got ready to muster the greatest number of votes
and to send to the chamber the greatest possible num­
ber of representatives.
An election may be considered a childish play, in
which the most important part is played by the elected.
The “Honorables,” to be able to become so, do not over­
look any sort of contortion, of demagogy and compro­
mise. Fascism did not want to submit to the usual
forms of that silly farce. We decided to create a large
National list on which places had to be found not only
for known, tried and faithful custodians and trustees of
Fascism, but also for those who in the active national
life had been able to uphold the dignity of their coun­
try. Fascism by this policy gave full proof of great po­
litical wisdom and probity. It even tolerated men of
opposing or doubtful position because they could serve.
In the National list were included ex-presidents of the
Council, such as Orlando, and of the Chamber, such as

Five Years of Government 215
De Nicola; but the main body of the list was made up of
new elements. It was, in fact, composed of two hundred
veterans, ten gold medals, one hundred and fourteen sil­
ver medals, ninety-eight bronze medals, eighty muti­
lated and war invalids, thirty-four volunteers. The ma­
jority of the list was drawn from the aristocracy of the
war and the victory.
The Socialists, divided from the Communists, shar­
pened their weapons, and so did the Populars. But from
the ballot boxes of April 6th there flowed a full, irrev­
ocable, decisive victory for the National list. It ob­
tained five million votes against the two millions repre­
sented by all the other lists put together. My policy and
our regime was supported by the people. I then could be
indulgent toward our adversaries, instead of pressing
them harder, as I might have done.
I directed that political battle staying in Milan. I
attached no great importance to the results of the elec­
toral struggle, but it interested me as an expression of
the support and the enthusiasm which, in every Italian
city, had already been given to the National Fascist list.
This indorsement by the people encouraged my thesis
and my governmental work. Having gone back to Rome
I was received as a returning victor, and, from the bal­
cony of the Palazzo Chigi, while I saluted the people
and the city of Rome, I congratulated the new and
greater Italy, in which men of good faith were all in
harmony.
This was my synthesis: Let Parties die and the Coun­
try be saved.

216

My Autobiography

On May 24th, with unusual solemnity, came the open­
ing of the Twenty-seventh Legislature. His Majesty
the King made a very impressive speech. The hall had
the appearance of a great occasion. For petty political
reasons, the elements which denied the country and be­
littled Italian life determined to stay away. The in­
auguration of the Twenty-seven l,h Legislature, how­
ever, did not lose anything in its fulness and moral
value. Particularly well received were the veterans,
some of whom were very much decorated. Now there
stirred, in that old chamber, so used to mean and petty
political intrigues, a breath of new life; there was pres­
ent a heroic sense of the new soul of Italy, a sense of a
living aspiration for greatness.
All these things irritated the Socialists. In their hearts
they had hated the war, had debased our victory. The
old parliamentary world could not adjust itself to this
magnificent gathering of youth. The congenital coward­
liness of Montecitorio, the seat of parliament, would
certainly refuse homage to the bravery symbolized by
these golden medals!
The deep dissension between the new and the old
Italy was revived again at Montecitorio. This dissen­
sion persisted in the atmosphere of parliament even
after it had been beaten and overcome by Fascism in
the squares and streets of Italy and in the hearts of the
nation. In the historic meeting of May 24th, 1924, that
sad antipathy was to have its epilogue. Not by mere
chance had I chosen the precise date of our entrance into
the war.

Five Years of Government 217
After some days the usual parliamentary discussions
began. The seating of new deputies roused violent
diatribes. The Socialists, who were absent from the cere­
mony of May 24th, had again taken up their posts of
combat. The atmosphere was red-hot. I knew that it
would be necessary to give a different tone to all our
political life, especially to parliamentary life—there was
no use my cherishing illusions about that. With very
great patience I succeeded in appeasing the first tumul­
tuous meetings. Nothing proved more effective in ele­
vating the plane of the discussion than a speech deliv­
ered on June 6th by the blind veteran, Carlo Delcroix.
On June 7th I answered all the opponents exhaustively.
I denounced their maneuvres. I remember that I ad­
monished every one in the name of Fascist martyrdom
and in the name of the peace of souls, to attend solely
to productive activities. I added: “We feel that we rep­
resent the Italian people and we declare that we have
the right to scatter to the winds the ashes of your spites
and of our spites, so that we may feed with powerful
lymph, in the course of years and centuries, the vener­
able and intangible body of the country.”
I felt the necessity of making in parliament a high
appeal for calm, for a sense of balance and justice. I
was animated by a deep and sincere desire for peace.
But the success of my words was apparent only; in the
ardors of the parliamentary political struggle scenes un­
worthy of any assembly took place.
The Socialists had been hit in their most sensitive
spots; they had been slammed against reality. They were

218

My Autobiography

outnumbered, amazed by the rush of Italian youth, dis­
mayed by the new direction events were taking. All the
new political realism was in full antagonism to their
leanings; they were beaten and they felt it. In such a
situation, the Socialists wanted as a last resort to
squeeze out some way of avoiding surrender, at least, in
parliament.
Skillful and astute in every political art, they pro­
tracted without end all the annoyances they could de­
vise. It was a game played with the deliberate aim to
destroy and tear down. 1 n this subtle work of exaspera­
tion, Matteotti, the deputy, distinguished himself above
all others. lie was a Socialist from the province of Rovigo, whose arrogant spirit held tenaciously to the prin­
ciple of political dissolution. As a Socialist he hated
war. In this attitude he reached a degree of absurdity
even beyond that attained by any other Socialist. In the
tragic period after the defeat at Caporetto, he had set
himself against our Venetian refugees. Matteotti de­
nied shelter to those unhappy people who fled from the
lands then invaded by the enemy and in which the Austrians were committing every sort of violence. He said
that they ought to remain under Austrian domination!
To this parliamentary battle of polemics he now
brought his whole bag of tricks and devices. Being a
millionaire, he considered socialism as a mere parlia­
mentary formula. It is to be remembered, however, that
he was an ardent fighter, well able to irritate his adver­
saries in the whirlwind of the struggle, but he was far
from being able seriously to imperil the assembly and

Five Years of Government 219
to silence such a party as the Fascist. Matteotti was not
a leader. In that same Socialist party there were indi­
viduals who surpassed him in powers of debate, in tal­
ent, and in coherence. In his electoral districts he had
had violent fights with the Fascists, and in the chamber
he had at once revealed himself as a most zealous and
pugnacious opponent.
One day Matteotti disappeared from Rome. Imme­
diately it was whispered about that a political crime had
been committed. The Socialists were looking for a mar­
tyr who might be of use for purposes of oratory, and at
once, before anything definite could possibly be known,
they accused Fascism. By my orders, we began a most
painstaking and complete investigation. The govern­
ment was determined to act with the greatest energy,
not only for the sake of justice, but also to stop, from
the very first moment, the spread of any kind of
calumny. I threw the Prefect and Police Chief of Rome,
the Secretary of the Interior, Finzi, and the Chief of
the Press Office, Cesare Rossi, into the task of clearing
up the mystery. Activity on the part of the police for
the discovery of the guilty persons was ordered without
stint. Very soon it was possible to identify the guilty.
They were of high station. They came from the Fascist
group, but they were completely outside our responsi­
ble elements.
The sternest proceedings were instituted against
them without limit or reservation. Severe measures were
taken—so severe indeed that in some cases they proved
to be excessive.

220

My Autobiography

The suspects were arrested at once. Among the re­
sponsible elements, those who had had relations with the
guilty ones, merely because they were under suspicion
retired, though innocent, from public life. No threat of
restraint was laid on the authorities, the police and the
courts.
All this should have stilled the storm.
On the contrary. This dramatic episode was destined
to disturb the austere serenity that I had imposed on
myself and on every one, in the general policy of the
country. Though we were still living in an atmosphere
incandescent with passion, with polemics and violent
battles, it seemed hardly possible that only a few days
after the opening of the Twenty-seventh Legislature,
a group of men of position could carry through an en­
terprise which, begun as a jest, was to conclude in a
tragedy. I always have had harsh and severe words for
what happened. But despite the faithful and energetic
behavior of the central government, there now burst
out an unparalleled offensive against Fascism and
against its leader. The opposition in the chamber gave
the first signal of an attack in grand style. I perceived
and foresaw immediately the ignoble game, which grew,
not from any love for the poor victim, but solely from
hate for Fascism. I was not surprised. In the chamber,
when weak men already were hesitating, I said:
“If it is a question of lamenting, if it is a question of
condemning, if it is a question of regretting the victim,
if it is a question of pressing our prosecution of all the
guilty and those responsible, we here repeat that this

Five Years of Government 221
will be done calmly and inexorably. But if from this
very sad happening some one seeks to draw an argu­
ment for anything but a wider reconciliation of all men
on the basis of an accepted and recognised need of na­
tional concord—if any one should try to stage upon this
tragedy a show of selfish political character for the pur­
pose of attacking the government, it must be known
that the government will defend itself at any cost. The
government, with undisturbed conscience, sure of hav­
ing already fulfilled its duty and willing to do it in the
future, will adopt the necessary means to crush a trick
which, instead of leading to the harmony of Italians,
would trouble them with the deepest dissensions and
passions.”
These words did not penetrate minds already har­
dened. And there happened exactly what I had fore­
seen; the opposition threw themselves on the corpse of
Matteotti in order to poison the political life of Italy
and to cast calumnies on Fascism both in Italy and
abroad.
The course of Italian public life from June till De­
cember, 1924, offered a spectacle absolutely unparal­
leled in the political struggle of any other country. It
was a mark of shame and infamy which would dishonor
any political group. The press, the meetings, the subver­
sive and anti-Fascist parties of every sort, the false in­
tellectuals, the defeated candidates, the soft-brained
cowards, the rabble, the parasites, threw themselves like
ravens on the corpse. The arrest of the guilty was not
enough. The discovery of the corpse and the sworn state­

222

My Autobiography

ment of surgeons that death had not been due to a crime
but had been produced by trauma was not enough.
Instead, the discovery of the corpse in a hedge near
Rome, called the Quartarella, unstopped an orgiastic
research into the details which is remembered by us un­
der the ignominious name of “Quartarellismo.”
Fortunes were built on the Matteotti tragedy; they
speculated on portraits, on medals, on commemorative
dates, on electric signs; a subscription was opened by
subversive newspapers and even now the accounts are
still open.
The opposition parties and their representatives in
the chamber retired from Montecitorio and threatened
not to participate further in legislative work; to this
movement and to those who espoused it was given, by
false analogy with the well-known event of Roman his­
tory, the name of Aventino. But the Aventino group
was here reduced to a grotesque parody, in which hate
and nakedness of power now reunited men of the most
diverse political complexions. They ranged all the way
from Socialists to Liberals, from Democrat-Masons to
Populars, who pretended to be called Catholics. Clan­
destine meetings were held. They abused in every way
the liberty of the press and of assembly, in order to de­
stroy Italian life. Fanatical elements waited hour after
hour for Fascism to be overthrown. In the background
of this ignoble dramatic farce, there stood out the fig­
ure of senator Albertini, the happy owner of the news­
paper. This man was willing to scrape in the garbage,
to listen to all the dirty rogues, to collect the most men­

Five Years of Government

223

dacious pamphlets, trying somehow, sometime, some­
where, to hit at me and at Fascism.
I did not have a moment of doubt or discouragement.
I knew the attitudes, postures and poses of these ad­
versaries. I knew that if they could they would have
ignobly used the corpse of the Socialist deputy as an
anti-Fascist symbol and flag. But their ghoulish poli­
tics passed the bounds of my imagination. Besides these
speculators, there were those on the timid and flabby
fringes of Fascism. They let themselves be led astray
by the political atmosphere. They did not perceive that
an episode is not the stuff of which history should be
made. In the name of a sentimental morality, they were
willing to kill a great moral and political probity and
knife the welfare of an entire nation.
In this situation there were also many repentant Magdalenes, and many, impelled by the sad habit of many
Italians to consider as pure gold the acts and the work
of any opposition, hid their Fascist insignia and, trem­
bling, abandoned the Fascist nation, already grown redhot from a thousand attacks and counter-attacks of its
adversaries.
We Avere going back into the depths of a revolution­
ary period, with all the excesses of such an abnormal
time, all its spites, troubles, and explosions. An atmos­
phere was formed in which many magistrates, often un­
der Masonic influence, could certainly not give equi­
table and faultless judgments. Various parties beyond
the borders were giving help to the Socialists at home.
It was then clear to what extent anti-Fascism was still

224

My Autobiography

abroad in certain international zones where Democracy,
Socialism and Liberalism had consolidated their weight
of patronage, blackmail and parasitism.
All this might have created for a moment, in certain
political atmospheres, the illusion that the government
had weakened. In December, 1924, at the end of that
painful three months, some were calculating the days
of life of our ministry. A great hope sprang up in the
hearts of the politically hungry. There was, in fact, a
miserable maneuvre on the part of the three former
presidents of the council; they were able to delude
themselves and others. But these professional political
men have so little practical sense that they could not
understand that with one breath I could have given an
order to the Black Shirts which would have overturned
once and for all their fancies and their dreams.
The swelled frogs waited for their triumph. The cor­
rupt press gave the maximum of publicity to the calum­
nies, to incitation to commit crimes and to spread
defamation. The Crown, supreme element of equilib­
rium, was violently menaced with blackmail and worse.
As ever, there were adventurers who were eager to
speculate on any turn in the tide of events in order to
create again for themselves a political rebirth. This base
and pernicious crew I, for my part, have always elimi­
nated from the sphere of activity and position controlled
by me.
As if all this were not enough, in that dark Decem­
ber of 1924, to complete the picture, Cesare Rossi, the
former chief of the press office, tried a rascally trick.

Five Years of Government 225
This man, cast out from Fascism because he was im­
plicated in the Matteotti affair, prepared a memorial
which was a tissue of lies and libels. lie aimed to involve
the regime in guilt, and consequently to involve me.
Everything that had happened or was happening in
Italy he endeavored to put on my doorstep. This me­
morial, written by such a man, pretended to present a
“moral indictment” of me. But in that field I cannot be
attacked; every attempt of this sort is empty. I was in­
formed beforehand of the plot that Rossi was going to
attempt; I knew the contents of his memorial and the
day on which it was to be printed in the papers of the
opposition. I put an end to the miserable maneuvre.
I published the memorial in a friendly paper; in this
way I indicated that I gave no value to it. It was a jest
and a delusion. The theatrical stroke fell on emptiness;
the bubble swelled by slanders flattened like a pricked
balloon.
The contemptible game lasted six months. The half­
hearted had sunk beneath the surface; the singers of
the doleful tunes felt their throats becoming parched.
The speculators were now disgusted with themselves.
In that period a former minister, decorated with the
Collare dell’Annunziata, the highest order of Italy’s
sovereign, alligned himself with the cult of Republican­
ism and with the worst elements of the Socialists!
I held the Fascist party firmly in my hand during
this period. I curbed the impulses of some Fascists who
wanted violent reprisals with a clear order: “Hands in
the pockets! I am the only one that must have his hands

226

My Autobiography

free.” In Florence and Bologna, however, there oc­
curred episodes of extreme violence. I understood then
that it was time to speak and act.
In all that time I credit myself with the fact that I
never lost my calm nor my sense of balance and justice.
Because of the serene judgment that 1 endeavor to sum­
mon to guide my every act, I ordered the guilty to be
arrested. I wanted justice to f o l l o w its unwavering
course. Now I had f u l f i l l e d my task and my duty as a
just man. Now against my adversaries I could play my
own game—in the open.
When the menace of a general strike in the Province
of Rome arose, I ordered the Florentine legions of the
Militia to parade in the streets of the Capital. The
armed Militia with its war songs is a great agent of per­
suasion. It is an argument. In September, 1924, I had
visited the most intense zones of the Tuscan Fascism;
I went among the strong populations of the Amiata,
among the workers and peasants, among the miners of
the province of Siena. On that occasion, while opponents
hourly awaited my fall—and that was also the secret
hope of many enemies beyond the borders—I delivered
to the Fascists an audacious sentence in which I sounded
an affirmation of strength and victory:
Of our adversaries, I said, “we will make a litter for
the Black Shirts.”
The opposition press made a great fuss about these
words; but their chattering had no importance. That
became clear on January 3rd, 1925. On that day, when
Rome was already full of the exiled from the provinces

Five Years of Government 227
and of those who tremblingly awaited the conclusion
of the political struggle, I made in parliament this
speech, which certainly was not lacking in reserve:

Gentlemen,
The speech I am going to make before you might not be
classed as a parliamentary speech. It may be possible that,
at the end, some of you will find that this speech is tied, even
though a space of time has elapsed, to the one I pronounced
in this same hall on November 16th. Such a speech can lead
somewhere, but it cannot lead to a political vote. In any
case let it be known that I am not looking for this vote. I do
not want it; I have had plenty. Article 47 of the Statute
says: “The Chamber of the Deputies has the right to accuse
the Ministers of the King and to bring them to face the
High Court of Justice.” I formally ask if in this Chamber,
or outside it, there is any one who wants to make use of Ar­
ticle 47. My speech will then be very clear; it will bring
about an absolute clarification. You can understand this.
After having marched for a long time with comrades to
whom our gratitude always will go out for what they have
done, it is good sense to stop to consider whether the same
route, with the same companions, could be followed in the
future.
Gentlemen, I am the one who brings forth in this hall the
accusations against me.
It has been said that I would have founded a “Cheka.”
Where? When? In what way? Nobody is able to say. Rus­
sia has executed without trial from one hundred and fifty
thousand to one hundred and sixty thousand people, as
shown by statistics almost official. There has been a Cheka
in Russia which has exercised terror systematically over all
the middle classes and over the individual members of those
classes, a Cheka which said it was the red sword of revolution.
But an Italian Cheka never has had a shadow of existence.
Nobody has ever denied that I am possessed of these three

228

My Autobiography

qualities; a discreet intelligence, a lot of courage and an
utter contempt for the lure of money.
If I had founded a Cheka I would have done it following
the lines of reasoning that I have always used in defending
one kind of violence that can never be eliminated from his­
tory.
I have always said—and those who have always followed
me in these five years of hard struggle can now remember
it—that violence, to be useful in settling anything, must be
surgical, intelligent and chivalrous. Now, all the exploits of
any so-called Cheka have always been unintelligent, passion­
ate and stupid.
Can you really think that I could order—on the day fol­
lowing the anniversary of Christ’s birth when all saintly
spirits are hovering near—-can you think that I could order
an assault at ten o’clock in the morning in the Via Fran­
cesco Crispi, in Rome, after the most conciliatory speech
that I ever made during my Government?
Please do not think me such an idiot. Would I have
planned with the same lack of intelligence the minor assaults
against Misuri and Forni? You certainly remember my
speech of June 7th. It should be easy for you to go back to
that week of ardent political passion when, in this hall, mi­
nority and majority clashed every day, so much so that some
persons despaired of ever being able to re-establish those
terms of political and civil cooperation most necessary be­
tween the opposite parties in the Chamber. The shuttles of
violent speeches were flying from one side to the other. Fi­
nally on June 6th Delcroix with his lyric speech, full of life
and passion, broke that storm-charged tension.
The next day I spoke to clear the atmosphere. I said to
the opposition, “I recognize your ideal rights, your con­
tingent rights. You may surpass Fascism with your experi­
ence; you may put under immediate criticism all the mea­
sures of the Fascist Government.”
I remember, and I have still before my eyes the vision of
this part of the Chamber, where all were attentive, where all
felt that I had spoken deep, living words, and that I had

Five Years of Government 229
established the basis for that necessary living-together with­
out which it is not possible to continue even the existence of
any political assembly.
How could I, after a success—let me say that without
false or ridiculous modesty—after a success so clamorous
that it was admitted by all the Chamber, opposition included,
a success because of which the Chamber opened again the
next Wednesday in a good atmosphere, how could I think,
without being struck with mad extravagance, to order, I
won’t say a murder, but even the slightest, the most petty
offense against that very adversary whom I esteemed be­
cause he had a certain courage which looked like my courage,
and an obstinacy which appeared like my obstinacy in sus­
taining a thesis?
They have the minds of crickets who pretend that I was
making only cynical gestures on that occasion. Such gestures
are the last to be tolerated by me; they are repugnant to
the very depths of my conscience. And I feel as strongly
against the show of strength.
What strength? Against whom? With what aim? When
I think about that, Gentlemen, I remember those strategists
who, during the War, while we were eating in the trenches,
made strategy with little pins on the maps. But when the
problem is to get something done at the place of command
and responsibility, things are seen in another light and have
a different appearance. And yet on enough occasions, I have
proved my energy. I have usually not failed to meet events.
I have settled in six hours a revolt of the Royal Guards.
In a few days I have broken an insidious revolt. In fortyeight hours I brought a division of Infantry and half of the
fleet to Corfu. These gestures of energy—and the last one
amazed even one of the greatest generals of a friendly Na­
tion—are cited here to demonstrate that it is not energy that
fails me.
The death punishment? But that is a joke, Gentlemen!
First of all, the death punishment must be inflicted under
the penal code and, in any case, capital punishment cannot
be the reprisal of a Government!

230

My Autobiography

It must be inflicted with restrained, better let us say very
restrained, judgment, when the question is the life of a citi­
zen. It was at the end of that month which is carved deeply
into my life, that I said, “I want peace for the Italian people
and I want to re-establish normal political life.”
What was the answer to this policy of mine? First of all
the secession of the Aventino—anti-constitutional secession,
clearly revolutionary! Then a campaign of the press which
lasted throughout the months of June, July and August. A
dirty, miserable campaign which dishonored us for three
months. The most fantastic, Ibc most terrifying, the most
frightful lies were affirmed extensively in the press.
Investigations of underground happenings were also
made; they invented things, they knew they were lying, but
it was done all the same! I have always been peaceful and
calm amid the storm. That storm will be remembered by
those who will come after us with a sense of intimate shame.
On September eleventh, somebody wanted to revenge a kill­
ing and shot one of our best men. lie died poor—he had
sixty lires in his pocket. But I continue my effort to nor­
malize. I repress illegalities. I state the bare truth when I
say that even now in our jails there are hundreds and hun­
dreds of Fascists.
It is the bare truth when I recall to you that I reopened
the Parliament on the fixed date and that the discussion
covered, with no lack of regularity, almost all the budgets.
It is the bare truth that that oath of which you know is
taken by the Militia and that the nomination of all the gen­
erals for all the zone commands is conducted as it is.
Finally a question which raised our passions was pre­
sented—the question of accepting the resignation of Giunta.
The Chamber was excited. I understood the sense of that
revolt; however, after forty-eight hours I used my prestige
and my influence. To a riotous and reluctant assembly I
said: “Accept the resignation,” and the resignation was ac­
cepted.
But this was not enough; I made a last effort to create
normal conditions—the plan for electoral reform. How was

Five Years of Government 231
that answered? It was answered by an accentuation of the
campaign and by the assertion, “Fascism is a horde of bar­
barians camped on the Nation, and a movement of bandits
and marauders.” Now they stage, Gentlemen, the moral
question! We know the sad history of moral questions in
Italy.
But after all, Sirs, what butterflies are we looking for
under the arch of Titus? Well, I declare here before this
assembly, before all the Italian people, that I assume, I
alone, the political, moral, historical responsibility for every­
thing that has happened. If sentences, more or less maimed,
are enough to hang a man, out with the noose! If Fascism
has only been castor oil or a club, and not a proud passion
of the best Italian youth, the blame is on me!
If Fascism has been a criminal association, if all the vio­
lence has been the result of a determined historical, politi­
cal, moral delinquency, the responsibility for this is on me,
because I have created it with my propaganda from the time
of our intervention in the War to this moment.
In these last days not only the Fascists but many citizens
ask themselves: Is there a Government? Have these men
dignity as men? Have they dignity also as a Government?
I have wanted to reach this determined extreme point. My
experience of the life of these six months is rich. I have tried
the Fascist Party. Just as to try the temper of some metals
it is necessary to hit them with a hammer, so have I tested
the temper of certain men. I have seen their value; I have
seen for what reasons, at some moment when the wind seems
contrary, they turn around the corner. I have tested my­
self. And be sure that I would not have persisted in measures
if they had not been for the interests of the Nation. A peo­
ple does not respect a Government which allows itself to be
scorned. The people want to see their own dignity reflected
in a Government, and the people, even before I said it, said,
“Enough! The measure is filled.”
And why was it filled? Because the revolt of the Aventino
has a republican background.
This sedition of the Aventino has had consequences, for

232

My Autobiography

now whoever in Italy is a Fascist risks his life! In the two
months of November and December eleven Fascists were
killed. One had his head crushed, and another one, an old
man seventy-three years old, was killed and thrown from a
high wall. Three fires happened in one month, three mysteri­
ous fires on the railroads, one in Rome, another in Parma,
and the third in Florence. Then came a subversive movement
everywhere.
A chief of a squad of the Militia severely wounded by
subversives.
A fight between Carabinieri and subversives in Genzano.
An attempted attack against the seat of the Fascists in
Tarquinia.
A man wounded by subversives in Verona.
A soldier of the Militia wounded in the Province of Cre­
mona.
Fascists wounded by subversives in Forli.
Communist ambush in San Giorgio di Pcsaro.
Subversives who sing the “Red Flag” ami attack Fascists
in Monzambano.
In the three days of this January, 1925, and in a single
zone incidents occurred in Mestre, Pionca, Valombra; fifty
subversives armed with rifles strolled through the country
singing the “Red Flag” and exploding petards. In Venice
the Militiaman Pascai Mario was attacked and wounded. In
Cavaso di Treviso another Fascist was hurt. In Crespano,
the headquarters of the Carabinieri were invaded by about
twenty frantic women, a chief of a detachment of Militia
was attacked and thrown into the water. In Favara di Vene­
zia Fascists were attacked by subversives.
I bring your attention to these matters because they are
symptoms. The Express train No. 192 was stoned by sub­
versives who broke the windows.
In Moduno di Livenza, a chief of the squad was attacked
and beaten. You can see by this situation that the sedition
of the Aventino has had deep repercussions throughout the
whole Country. And then comes the struggle in which one
side says: Enough! When two elements are struggling the

Five Years of Government 233
solution lies in the test of strength. There never was any
other solution in history, and never will be.
Now I dare to say that the problem will be solved. Fas­
cism, the Government, the Party, is at its highest efficiency.
Gentlemen, you have deceived yourselves! You thought that
Fascism was ended because I was restraining it, that the
Party was dead because I was holding it back. If I should
use a hundredth part of the energy that I used to compress
the Fascists, to loosen them. . . . Oh! You should see, for
then . . .
But there will be no need of that, because the Government
is strong to break fully and finally this revolt of the Aven­
tino.
Italy, Gentlemen, wants peace, wants quiet, wants work,
wants calm; we will give it with love, if that be possible, or
with strength, if that be necessary.
You can be sure that in the forty-eight hours following
this speech the situation will be clarified in every corner. We
all know that this is not a personal fancy, not lust for gov­
ernment, not base passion, but only infinite and powerful
love for my Country.

These words, restrained till then, together with my
disdain and my force of expression, suddenly awoke
Fascist Italy. The situation, as I had foreseen, was
clarified in forty-eight hours. The papers of the opposi­
tion, which till then had been full of envy, hate and de­
famatory attacks, began to slink into their holes again.
A new situation, full of power and responsibility, was
developing. Fascism had now all the attributes—after
the long “quartarellista” parenthesis—to enable it to
march onward and to govern by itself.
It was on that occasion that the Liberal ministers
Sarrocchi and Casati, and also the minister Oviglio, a

234

My Autobiography

tepid Fascist, asked to resign from the ministry. I re­
placed them with three Fascist ministers. We were com­
ing back by the force of events to the historical origins
of our movement, back to pure irreconcilableness.
Fascism, after my words full of my faith and my
willingness to show audacity, was coming back to its
warrior soul. Immediately, all those who were out of
Fascism wanted to participate in our movement, but
in order not to load too much on our party the mem­
bership lists were closed.
Victory was complete. The maneuvre of the former
premiers definitely failed and became ridiculous, just
as did other artificial structures attempted about that
time. One was a movement inspired by Uenelli, under
the name of the Italian League, to create secessions
from Fascism, and another an underhand maneuvre by
some shortweight grandchildren of Garibaldi.
At the end of January, 1925, the Aventino, with all
our opponents, appeared to have been destroyed, torn
to pieces by a thousand internal discords and differences.
I was winner again on the whole front and I was get­
ting ready to channel the Fascist revolution into insti­
tutions and into constitutional forms.
On October 28th, 1924, the National Militia, which
represents the best of Fascism and which has always
been my beloved creation, had sworn loyalty to the
King. Now it was necessary to bring the Constitution
of 1848 up to date and to create new representative in­
stitutions, worthy of the new Italy.
With this aim I brought about the nomination of a

Five Years of Government 235
commission of eighteen experts on statecraft. I charged
them with the preparation of proposals of reforms to be
presented to our legislative organs.
The commission was then called the Commission of
the Solons. It concluded its work, after a certain time,
suggesting some improvements in the old Constitution
and the creation of new institutions. I afterward used
the recommendations as a base. The commission at the
time did not lay down definite lines, but it contributed
to the reforms which later on I began to see taking
clearer shape and which were approved by the two
branches of the national parliament.
A law against secret societies was voted; so legal
sanction was given to the struggle maintained by Fas­
cism against Masonry. In fact, in 1925, it was ridiculous
to think that there could exist societies constituted for
performing a clandestine public act, outside the control
of the person who has the supreme direction of public
affairs and beyond the control of all who fulfill any
function of the law.
A secret political society in modern, contemporary
life is a thing of nonsense, when it is not a menace. I
settled it that all associations should be known in their
aims, in their formations, membership and develop­
ments.
It was at that time that Federzoni, then Minister of
the Interior, prepared with my full approval the new
law on public safety. Then we intrusted the Communes
to the “Podesta,” drawing them away from the old elec­
toral patronages, which were no longer suited to our

236

My Autobiography

time and our temper. The Governship of Rome was in­
stituted and there began, because I had made up my
mind to it, an inexorable fight against the Mafia in
Sicily, the bandits in Sardinia, and against other less
widely known forms of crime, which had humiliated en­
tire regions.
In February, 1925,1 fell desperately ill. For obvious
reasons, and perhaps because of exaggerated apprehen­
sion, any exact account of my condition and of my ill­
ness was never given out. I admit that the situation was
in a certain way very grave. For forty days I could not
come out of the house. My enemies now put their great
hope in the illusion, revived by their desire, that my end
was near. The Fascisti, because of my silence and the
contradictory reports that were circulating, were very
troubled. Never, so much as then, did I understand that
I was indispensable to my men, to my devoted people,
to all the great masses of Italian people. I had lively,
vibrating and moving manifestations of solidarity, of
devotion, of good will. The Black Shirts roared impa­
tiently to see me.
When finally at the end of March, on the sixth«anmversary of the foundation of Fascism, I appeared
healed on the balcony of the Palazzo Chigi, I had in
front of me all of Rome. The sight of me still thin and
pale stirred deep emotion. I saluted the multitude in
the name of Spring, and among other things I said,
“Now will ccme the best!” This sentence was inter­
preted in a thousand senses and aroused a wave of
plaudits and approbation.

Five Years of Government 237
The wise treatment of very clever doctors, such as
Professor Bastianelli and Professor Marchiafava,
healed me completely. Those miserable persons who had
based their hopes upon my illness were baffled. Nothing
is more hateful to me than a hope that an illness may
end one’s adversary. I am more alive and stronger than
ever before. I could repeat what I said one day, after
an attempt against my life: “The bullets pass, Musso­
lini remains.”
Another train of events which was to mark my com­
plex and difficult existence was the attempts against my
life.
Zaniboni initiated the series. He was a vulgar Social­
ist, who received two checks of 150,000 francs each from
the Czechoslovakian Socialists to lead an anti-Fascist
struggle. Naturally Zaniboni, a drug addict, used the
300,000 francs to prepare with devilish ability for his
attempt against me. He chose the sacred day of the
commemoration of the victory. He ambushed himself
in a room of the Hotel Dragoni, just in front of the
Palazzo Chigi, from the balcony of which I usually re­
view the processions which pass on the way to the altar
of the Unknown Soldier to offer their flowers, their
vows and their homage.
Having an Austrian rifle with fine sights, the fellow
could not miss his aim. Zaniboni, to avoid being sus­
pected, dressed himself in the uniform of a major of the
army, and got ready in the morning to accomplish his
crime. He was discovered. He had been followed for a
long time. A few days before, General Capello had

238

My Autobiography

generously given him money and advice. Masonry had
made of him its ensign. But by simultaneous action,
Zaniboni, General Capello and various less important
personages in the plot were arrested one hour before
they planned the attempt.
So closed the first chapter.
In 1926, in the month of April, when I inaugurated
the International Congress of Medicine, a crazy and
megalomaniac woman of English nationality, exalted
by fanaticism, came near my motor car and at close
range fired a shot that perforated my nostrils. A centi­
meter’s difference and the shot might have been fatal.
It was, as I said, a mad, hysterical woman, led on by
elements and persons never clearly identified.
I abandoned her to her destiny by putting her beyond
the frontier, where she could meditate on her failure
and her folly.
Just after the occurrence, before my nose was out of
its dressings, I was speaking to a meeting of officials
from all parts of Italy. I felt impelled to say, “If I go
forward, follow me; if I recoil, kill me; if I die, avenge
me!”
Another attempt which might have had grave results
was that of an anarchist, called Lucetti, who had come
back from France with his soul full of hate and envy
against Fascism and against me. He waited for me in
the light and large Via Nomentana, in front of Porta
Pia. He was able to meditate his crime in silence. He
had been eight days in Rome and carried powerful
bombs. Lucetti recognized my car, while I was going to

Five Years of Government 239
the Palazzo Chigi, and as soon as he saw it he hurled at
me the infernal machine, which hit an angle of the car
and bounced back on the ground, exploding there after
I had passed. I was not wounded, but innocent people
were hurt and taken to the hospital.
When arrested, the miserable man could justify his
crazy act only by his anti-Fascist hate. I did not attach
a great importance to the episode. Having to meet the
English ambassador, I went directly to the Palazzo
Chigi and the conversation with the foreign diplomat
continued calmly enough until a great popular demon­
stration in the streets interrupted us. Only then the
English ambassador, somewhat amazed, learned of the
attempt against my life.
The last attempt was made on October 31st, 1926. It
was in Bologna, after I had lived a day full of life, en­
thusiasm and pride.
A young anarchist, egged on by secret plotters, at
a moment when the whole population was lined up for
the salute, came out from the ranks and fired a gun at
my car. I was sitting near the “Podesta” of Bologna,
Arpinati. The shot burned my coat, but again I was
quite safe. The crowd, in the meanwhile, seized by an
impulse of exasperated fury, could not be restrained. It
administered summary justice to the man.
Other attempts were baffled. The exasperation was
now surpassing any limit. I understood that it was time
to stop the doleful game of the adversaries. The secret
societies, the opposition press, and deceitful political
cults had only one aim: it was to hit the chief of Fas­

240

My Autobiography

cism, so that all Fascism should be hit. The entire move­
ment that dominated Italy they believed turned on one
pivot, on a name, on a lone man. All the adversaries,
from the most hateful ones to the most intelligent, from
the slyest ones to the most fanatical, thought that the
only way of destroying Fascism was to destroy its
chief. The people themselves perceived this and de­
manded grave punishments for the criminals. The ex­
asperated Fascists wanted to admonish all those who
were conspiring in the darkness.
A policy of force was absolutely necessary. I took
over the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and launched the
laws for the defense of the regime, laws which were to
constitute the one essential basis for the new unified
national life.
I abolished the subversive press, whose only function
was to inflame men’s minds. Provincial commissions sent
to confinement professional subversives. Not a day goes
by that we do not feel in Italian life how much good
has been wrought by these measures against the forces
of disintegration, disorder and disloyalty.
I must then conclude that a strong policy has yielded
really tangible results. Every day the country feels in­
tensely the identification of Fascism with the vital
strength of the nation. Nobody suffers ostracism in
Italy; everybody is allowed to live under the definite
regime of law. Many elements of the old popular sub­
versives understand now to what extent a well regulated
life is a benefit, not only for one class, but for every
class of the Italian people. Few are those who are still

Five Years of Government 241
confined, and few are those who intend to disobey. As
Minister of the Interior, I distributed a circular on Jan­
uary 6th, 1927, to the Prefects, in which I pointed out
what their duty in regard to the population must be.
A new sense of justice, of serious purpose, of har­
mony and concord guides now the destinies of all the
peoples and classes of Italy. There are neither vexa­
tions nor violence, but there is exaltation of what is good
and exaltation of the virtue of heroism. In every class,
among all citizens, nothing is done against the state,
nothing is done outside the state.
Many have finally opened their eyes to this serene
and severe truth; the Italians feel themselves of one
fraternity in a great work of justice. The sense of duty,
the necessity of action, the manner of civil life mark
now an intense reawakening. The old parties are for­
ever dead. In Fascism politics is fused into a living
moral reality; it is a faith. It is one of those spiritual
forces which renovates the history of great and endur­
ing peoples.

CHAPTER XI

NEW PATHS

HEN one watches the building of new
structures, when hammers and concrete mix­
ers flash and turn, the occasion is not one for
asking the superintendent his opinion about the plays
of Bernard Shaw or for expecting the architect to bab­
ble discursively on the subject of his preferences be­
tween the mountains and the seashore as summer play­
grounds.
It is absurd to suppose that I and my life can be
separated from that which I have been doing and am
doing. The creation of the Fascist state and the pass­
ing of the hungry moments from sunrise to the deep
profundity of night with its promise of another dawn
eager for new labors, cannot be picked apart. I am lockstitched into this fabric. It and myself are woven into
one. Other men may find romance in the fluttering of
the leaves on a bough; as for me, whatever I might have
been, destiny and my own self have made me one whose
eyes, ears, whose every sense, every thought, whose en­
tire time, entire energy must be directed at the trunk of
the tree of public life.
The poetry of my life has become the poetry of con­
struction. The romance in my existence has become the

W

242

New Paths

243

romance of measures, policies, and the future of a state.
These to me are redolent with drama.
So it is that as I look back over nearly six years of
leadership I see the solution of problems, each of which
is a chapter in my life and a chapter in the life of my
country. A chapter, long or short, simple or complex,
in the history of the advance and experimentation and
pioneering of mankind.
I am not deeply concerned at being misunderstood.
It is more or less trivial that conspiracies go on to mis­
interpret and, indeed, entirely to misrepresent what I
have sought and why I have sought it. After all, I have
been too busy to hear the murmurs of liars.
He who looks back over his shoulder toward those
who lag and those who lie is a waster; it is because I
cannot write my life—my daily life, my active life, my
thinking life and even my own peculiar, emotional life
—without recording the steps I have taken to renew
Italy and find a new place for her in the general march
of civilization, that I call up one after another the rec­
ollection of my recent battles over measures which sub­
merge men, over policies which bury, under their sim­
plicity and weight, everything else I might have lived.
Two fields of my will and action, of my thoughts and
my conclusions, stand out as I write and as I record
my life itself.
I think of all of them in terms of utter simplicity,
stripped of complex phrases. I have seen the futility of
those who endlessly speak streams of words. These
words are like armies enlisted to go away forever into

244

My Autobiography

the night, never to return from a campaign in which
the enemies are compromise of principle, and cowardice,
inaction, and idealism without realism.
There are those, no doubt, who regard me or have
once regarded me as an enemy to the peace of the
world. To them there is nothing to say unless it be to
recommend my autobiography to them for careful
reading. The record of facts is worth more than the
accusation of fools.
From the first, I wanted to renovate from bottom to
top the foreign policy of Italy. Let it be remembered
that I was fully conscious always of the history and the
economic and spiritual possibilities of my country in its
relation to the world. Such a renovation, such a remak­
ing of policy, was absolutely new for us. It was destined
to meet serious preconceptions and misconceptions be­
fore it would be clearly understood and appreciated, not
only by Italians, but by those responsible for the for­
eign policies of various nations.
I was fully aware that a new spirit, one of new aus­
terity and dignity, imposed by me to govern every large
and small action of my ministry, might create the im­
pression that I wanted to fight to a finish old interna­
tional political tradition, organization, and existing alli­
ances and the status quo.
What an error I To inaugurate a firm stand does not
mean to revolutionize the course of international deal­
ings. To demand a better appraisal of Italy, in accord­
ance with a correct audit of our possibilities as a pow­
erful and prolific nation, was only to re-establish our
rightful position.

New Paths

245

My problem was to open the eyes of the responsible
elements in the various European governments and
chanceries. They had gone on rather blindly consider­
ing Italy to be in its unstable position after the war.
To open these eyes, sometimes with vigorous calls
for attention, was not always easy. I spent months and
years in bringing about a realization abroad that Italy’s
foreign policy had no tricks in it. It was always straight­
forward, and swerved not. It was always vigilant. It
was based on an accurate appraisal of facts, squarely
faced, and it demanded equally that others should face
facts. This understanding has contributed, naturally, to
bringing Italy higher on the horizon of the world’s eter­
nal dawn of new events.
A speech on foreign policy delivered by me in the
Italian senate in the spring of 1928 reviewed our entire
national and international situation, and the part that
Italy has played in the many little or great events of
world life. It set forth a clear review of my work. It
summarized the concrete success won by my ministry.
It brought out that we had correctly insisted upon new
appraisals of Italy’s part in the world.
But, before this concrete and tangible result was
reached, let no one believe that the steps were light and
easy. I knew well enough how many would look toward
Rome with suspicion, as if it were an irresponsible cen­
tre of disturbance. Enemies of our country and of Fas­
cism tried in every way in their power to strengthen,
by bad faith, by twisted interpretations, and by false
news, all the errors in foreign judgments of what I was
trying to do.

246

My Autobiography

But truth usually comes along behind any simple,
clear policy and overcomes the obliquity, the conven­
tional mentality, the spirit of opportunism, and the liebarking of the yesterdays.
There is no country in the world in which foreign
policy, though carefully carved out and approved by
the nation, is not subject to internal attack based on
ignorance or bad faith. Therefore it was no surprise to
me to find that even when I had calmed the internal
political situation and had established for us the main
points of the general policy of Italy within and with­
out, there were those who began an offensive of criti­
cism.
One of them was Count Sforza, who in October, 1922,
was in Paris as Italian ambassador.
This man, loquacious and irresponsible as a minister
in the past governments, had been a nuisance to the
country. He had linked his name with the Adriatic sit­
uation, humiliating for our nation. This former minis­
ter, an amateur in everything that concerned any per­
plexity of foreign policy, showed himself so vain that he
could not sense the delicacy of his position in Paris.
While in Italy events of historic character were matur­
ing, homesickness for lost power made him a bad ser­
vant of his own country. He even went to the point of
trying to create difficulties for the Fascist government
in the French capital. Already political groups there
were unfavorable to if not envious of, any new solidar­
ity in Italy. Count Sforza at once began to criticise
openly my declaration on foreign and internal policy,

New Paths

247

my political method and my concept of Fascist Italy.
I sent him a telegram, and this is what I said:
“I must interpret as a not quite amiable and rather an
awkward gesture, your decision to hand in your resignation
before having officially known my orders as to foreign pol­
icy, which I will disclose in the Chamber of Parliament; or­
ders that will not be merely a sum of sentiments and resent­
ments, as you wrongly think. I bid you now formally to
keep your place and not create difficulties for the Govern­
ment. In this moment, the Government represents the high­
est expression of the national conscience. I am waiting for a
telegraphic answer and I reserve my later decision as to you.
Mussolini.”

To this telegram Count Sforza made an elusive an­
swer. So I called him to Rome and after some explana­
tions which revealed our two minds to be in complete
antithesis, I relieved him of office and dismissed him
from his place. It was time that the central authority
should no longer be debated by those who occupied in­
ferior positions. Italian political life needs command
and organization and discipline. Our representatives
abroad were sometimes shown to have a cold, isolated,
autonomous life, far removed from their primary duties
toward their country.
This first strong gesture of mine was a clear signal;
it undoubtedly served as an example and admonition
for many others of our diplomatic representatives, who
tried to withdraw themselves, with subjective attitudes,
beyond the supreme authority of the state.
Having closed this breach in our diplomacy I dedi­
cated all my energies to the solution of those political

248

My Autobiography

problems which would determine our future. I found
facing me a situation already distorted and prejudiced
by the crass errors of preceding governments. I found
a series of peace treaties which, though in some respects
full of defects, nevertheless constituted as a whole an
unavoidable state of fact squarely to be met.
Still palpitating and open in Italy was the wound of
the Rapallo treaty with Jugoslavia. I wanted to medi­
cate that and heal it. On the delicate ground of treaties
I explained my position and suggestions in a speech
about foreign policy delivered in the chamber, Novem­
ber 16th, 1922. I said then, as I always say, that “treat­
ies, whether bad or good, must be carried out. A respec­
table nation can have no other programme. But treaties
are neither eternal nor irreparable. They are chapters of
history, not epilogues of history.” Speaking of foreign
policy in relation to the different groups of powers, I
summarized my thoughts with this definition: “We can­
not allow ourselves either a plan of insane altruism or
one of complete subservience to the plans of the other
peoples. Ours is then a poligy of autonomy. It shall be
firm and severe.”
In November, 1922,1 met, at Lausanne, Poincare of
France and Curzon of Great Britain. Let it be said that
I re-established then and there, on my first personal
contact with the Allies, our equality. There were some
clear and precise interviews; some went on to a rather
vivacious tune!
For the time had come for Italy, with its record of
sacrifice and with the weight of its history, to enter into

New Paths

249

an equality of standing in discussions of an international
nature side by side with England and France.
During my brief stay at Lausanne I held confer­
ences also with the Foreign Minister of Rumania and
with Mr. Richard Washburn Child, Ambassador of the
United States in Rome, and chief of the United States
delegation at the Conference. I eliminated also the ques­
tion of the Dodecannes.
To sum up my trip to Switzerland; these were the
results:
First, we made clear to foreign diplomats the new
prestige of Italy.
Second, we gave examples of our new style in for­
eign policy at the moment of initiating a direct contact
between myself and responsible diplomats of the world.
In December of that year, I made other important
declarations to the council of the ministers about our
foreign affairs. I examined again the Treaty of Rapallo. I began a solution of the problems of Fiume and
Dalmatia, making that solution fit in with the situation
created by the preceding treaties to which I had fallen
heir. For the second time I met Lord Curzon, and then
I went on to London, where I stayed for several days.
On that occasion I was received with the most generous
hospitality and found that I was listened to with respect
by the English political world.
Already the question of the Allies’ debts was on the
table. I had discussed this with Mr. Child and with the
British ambassador in Rome. I had a plan that I do
not hesitate to claim was one of the most efficacious for

250

My Autobiography

the solution of that problem. My plan aroused a cer­
tain interest among the Allies, but some divergencies
of a secondary character, and particularly the design of
France to occupy the Ruhr, killed that which in my
opinion was the most logical solution of the debt ques­
tion, combined with the problem of the German repara­
tions. It was a solution which might have permitted a
quick and powerful restoration of world economy.
Always before me in my foreign policy is the eco­
nomic aspect of international problems. That was why
in 1923 I concluded a series of commercial treaties, with
a political background, with a number of nations. It
amuses me to be called an anti-pacifist, in the light of
our record of treaty-making for peace and for fair in­
ternational dealings.
These commercial treaties were very helpful in set­
tling our economic position. In February of 1923 I
signed the Italian-Swiss treaty, concluded in Zurich; I
ratified the Washington treaty for the limitation of
naval armaments. Other commercial treaties were con­
cluded with Czechoslovakia, with Poland, with Spain,
and, finally, with France. I took the first steps to renew
commercial relations with Soviet Russia.
Our record in international affairs discloses a sleep­
less vigilance to build peace and make friends. More
peace, more friends. We yield nothing of our autonomy,
nor do we allow our power to be used as a pawn by oth­
ers. We are idealists in the sense that we endeavor to
make and keep peace by building and maintaining, brick
by brick, stone by stone, a structure of peace founded

New Paths

251

on realities rather than on dreams and visionary plans.
I have insisted upon being strong, but I have labored to
be generous.
For an efficient foreign service, the world requires
some housecleaning in its diplomatic machinery, which
has grown stale, over-manned, and bureaucratic, and
filled with feeble, petty conspiracies to gain place and
promotion.
I then began, in the reorganization of our consulates,
an elimination of foreign functionaries. That work was
long and wide-spread, because it was necessary to re­
build our old consular organization. The renovation,
complex as were its problems, was completed with un­
swerving insistence.
In the midst of this complex task of foreign policy
and machinery, and while I was studying the solution
of the Adriatic problem, there came the news that the
Italian military mission in Albania had been treacher­
ously ambushed on a road and massacred in its entirety
by bandits from the border. In this tragic happening
there were wiped out brave General Enrico Tellini,
Surgeon-Major Luigi Corte, Artillery Lieutenant
Mario Bonacmi, and a soldier, Farneti. The Italian
military mission was in Albania, together with other
foreign missions, with a well-defined task, laid out by
definite international agreements. The offense to Italy
and to the Italian name hit the sensibilities of Italy
squarely in the face. History furnishes other examples
of such outrages and points to accepted standards. I
made myself the interpreter of the righteous wrath of

252

My Autobiography

Italians everywhere. I at once sent an ultimatum to
Greece.
I demanded an apology. I demanded payment of
fifty million lire as indemnity.
Greece turned to us a deaf ear. Pretexts and excuses
met my request. There was an attempt by Greece to
find allies to aid her to slide away from my demands. I
would not play that base game. Without hesitation I
sent units of our naval squadron to the Greek island of
Corfu. There the Italian marines landed. At the same
time I sent a note to the powers. The League of Na­
tions declared itself incompetent to judge and solve the
incident. I continued the occupation of Corfu, declaring
clearly that Italy would withdraw from the League if
we could not obtain there a satisfactory attitude. This
was not a mere matter of insult by words; it concerned
the lives of Italian officers and soldiers. It was impos­
sible to believe that I could allow this tragic page to be
turned over with nothing more than some bureaucratic
gesture.
There has been so much misrepresentation and non­
sense as to this outrage and the settlement of our de­
mands that I may do well to state the simple facts,
which any school child can understand and digest.
The case, when brought for judgment to the Confer­
ence of the Ambassadors, received, as was to be ex­
pected, a verdict favorable to the Italian position.
Greece gave me all the satisfaction that I had asked.
The indemnity was paid. I offered ten millions of this
indemnity to the Greek refugees. Thereafter, having ob­

New Paths

253

tained full satisfaction, I recalled the squadron from
Corfu. The book was closed.
But that month was indeed one of tragic happenings.
The new Fascist style of foreign policy had satisfied the
sensibility of all the Italians, but I admit that it had
hurt the feelings of many foreign elements which saw
in my foreign policy something out of the ordinary, dis­
turbing to many and preventing plans opposed to the
rights of Italy. I allowed nothing to deflect me. I made
important declarations to the senate, both as to the
Greek incident and on the question of Fiume. I said
then that the most painful inheritance of our foreign
policy was Fiume, but that nevertheless I was treating
with Jugoslavia to solve, with the slightest possible
damage, the very grave Adriatic situation inherited as
a consequence of the Treaty of Rapallo.
The senate approved my policies and my acts.
In January, 1924,1 was able at last to conclude with
Pasic, the great Serb statesman, and with Nincic, the
Jugoslav minister, a new treaty between Italy and our
neighbor. As a consequence of this treaty Fiume became
Italian. Other moves, continued in 1925, brought to
signature the Nettuno Conventions, which regulated all
the relations of good neighborliness between the two
states. It remains for Jugoslavia to ratify.
At the end of all this diplomatic work on a wide field
we definitely lost Dalmatia, we lost cities sacred to Italy
by the history and the very soul of the populations
which live in them. These had been assured us by the
pact of London. No better settlement was possible than

254

My Autobiography

the one that I, with the good-will and the eagerness that
I and Pasic and Nincic put into the negotiations, was
able to draw up.
Though there is yet no Jugoslavian ratification of the
Nettuno Conventions, our borders are well guarded and
sure. Jugoslavia may show its good will; in any case we
now can look calmly into the eyes of our troubled
neighbor.
The foreign programme in 1924 obtained in the sen­
ate three hundred and fifteen favorable votes against
six, with twenty-six absent. In December of that same
year I had an interview with Chamberlain, new For­
eign Minister of the British Empire. In the many events
of international character I have always found him a
friend of Italy and of Italians.
In 1925 I had to undergo a lively struggle with the
government of Afghanistan. In the capital of that dis­
tant country one of our countrymen, an engineer, Piperno, who had gone there to work and study, had been
slain, as a consequence of some events of internal char­
acter. The Afghan government refused to pay an in­
demnity to the family of Piperno. I had to send some­
thing of a demand. Though it was a definite claim for
satisfaction, I did not close the door on the resumption
of good friendship with the distant state, and indeed, the
King of Afghanistan later had in Home the warmest
and most sympathetic of receptions.
The clouds come and pass away, and new clouds come
into our skies. A new cloud showed in the anti-Italian
propaganda, laid down by Germans in the region of

New Paths

255

our eastern border. In February, 1926, when the Fas­
cist policy had made its justice, its weight and strength
felt in the mixed-population zone of the High Adige,
I had to speak clearly as to the problem of our rela­
tions with those Germans behind the Brenner Pass. I
made two straight-from-the-shoulder speeches that
shook many a timid and selfconscious plotter or senti­
mentalist. These are not practised in the habits of a
school of courage and strength. I dismissed on that oc­
casion another ambassador, Bosdari, who, at the cen­
tre of an event as significant as was this, one concern­
ing deeply the relations between the Italian and the
German people, was not able to behave as we might ex­
pect an ambassador of a power like Italy to behave.
The frank speech that I made on that occasion—it
was cut from the same cloth as that I used in similar
circumstances against the policy of Seipel, Premier of
Austria—undoubtedly cleared our relations with the
German population behind the borders.
This question of the High Adige, however, was
framed in a wide vision of our relations with all other
states. It was just at that time that I had a series of
important interviews with the Bulgarian, Polish, Greek,
Turkish and Rumanian foreign ministers.
Thanks then to this intense political rhythm, Rome
became every day more and more a centre of attraction
for important political activities and political exchange.
The loyal character of my foreign policy, followed and
appreciated by all Italians, has given Italy more con­
sideration from other nations. A loyal policy is the one

256

My Autobiography

which scores the greatest success. Ambiguities and
vagueness are not in my temperament, and consequently
they are strangers to any policy of mine. I feel that I
can speak with firmness and dignity, because I have be­
hind me a people who, having fulfilled their duties, now
have sacred rights to defend and for which to demand
respect.
I have sent forth messages of brotherhood and faith
to the Italians who live beyond our borders; I did not
give them the name of emigrants, because in the past
this word has had a humiliating meaning, and it seemed
in some way to imply an inferior category of men and
women. I have been able, I am glad to say, to protect
my countrymen without wounding the susceptibilities
of other peoples. This protection is founded on interna­
tional law and on good sense in all exchanges between
nations.
Italy on its part has accorded the greatest hospitality
to all those who for business, for religious faith, for
pleasure, or even for curiosity have wanted to visit our
soil. I have taught Italians to show appropriate respect
for foreign representatives in our country; it is never
admissible, in fact, for diplomatic controversies to be
twisted or troubled by angry popular demonstrations
against embassies or consulates. Such disorders belong
to an old democratic habit which Fascism has clearly
outgrown. There have been delicate moments in Italian
affairs during which resentment and protest might easily
have been exhibited. I have always held these protests
within the limits of Fascist dignity, though often they

New Paths

257

have been exaggerated in the foreign press. This is no
slight undertaking, even for one who has imposed upon
himself the task of giving order and discipline to the
Italian people.
The foreign policy of Italy as directed by me has been
simple, understandable, and rests on these main points:
First, mine is a policy of peace. It is founded not
upon words, gestures, and mere paper transactions, but
comes from an elevated national prestige and from a
whole network of agreements and treaties which cement
harmony between peoples.
Second, I have not made any specific alliances with
the great powers. Instead, I have negotiated a series of
treaties which show a clear and decisive will to assure to
Italy a prosperity in its relations with all nations, espe­
cially with those of great historical importance, such as
England.
Nor have I failed to work out a whole series of
treaties with minor powers, so that Italian influence
could have its part in general progress. Albania is one
case. Hungary and Turkey are others. To assure har­
mony on the Mediterranean, I have established accord
with Spain; to make possible a greater development of
our industries and of our foreign trade, I resumed inde­
pendent commercial relations with Russia.
Stupid indeed are those who fail to see that I have
taken a serene, respectful attitude, but not a humble
one. The League of Nations and some of the diplomacy
inspired by the Locarno treaty are witnesses of that. I
made reservations, after meditated discussions, and be­

258

My Autobiography

cause of my well-grounded beliefs regarding the dis­
armament pacts, I noticed some absurdities in them.
I have bettered and completed the consular organi­
zation and I have put in it a series of new men born
with and grown out of Fascism. They have suffered the
passion of the war and the passion of our rebirth. In
the meantime I did not fail to bring Fascism also to our
colonies, I wanted to extend the standards which de­
manded discipline and insured full harmony for all
Italian initiatives. These must be concentrated from
now on in tbe representatives of our policies.
A sense of new life and pride fills not only the Ital­
ians in Italy, but all our countrymen scattered about the
world. Italy now enjoys the respect of those nations
which evolve and put into effect world policy.
My colonial policy has simple affinity with my for­
eign policy. Even taking into consideration the virtues
of our colonizing peoples, even remembering all the fine
human material we have given for the development of
entire regions of the African and American worlds, be­
fore the war and after, we had failed to realize the po­
tential possibilities of our colonial programme. We had
failed to bring it to vigor and fruitfulness.
We missed then that legitimate satisfaction which
should have come to us as of right and from duty ful­
filled during and after the war.
Colonial development would not have been for us
merely a logical consequence of our population prob­
lem, but would have provided a formula for the solu­
tion of our economic situation. Even now, at this dis­

New Paths

259

tance of ten years from the war, this problem has still
to find its full solution. Our colonies are few, and not all
open to extensive improvement. Eritrea, which is the
first of our colonies, has not undergone any change.
Somaliland has been augmented by British Giubaland,
following a diplomatic accord.
Lately, thanks to the wise policies of Governor De
Yecchi, we have pacified all Somaliland, and consider­
able Italian capital is moving toward that colony of
ours, to be used for definite objects and to provide work
for Italian labor. The Libian colony—which includes
Cirenaica and Tripolitania—was reduced during the
war to the occupation of the coast and some of the prin­
cipal cities. Fascism, on assuming power, found grave
conditions. These also have been cleared up. Our policy
of military occupation, and of course of economic pene­
tration, has assured us the full and uncontested domina­
tion of Cirenaica as far as Giarabub, and of Tripolitania
as far as the border recognized by treaties of interna­
tional character.
There is a great fervor of rebirth in both colonies.
Tripoli has become one of the most beautiful Mediter­
ranean cities. A congress of medical men has adjudged
it a health resort. We have found water for the city and
water in the hills for irrigation. I made a visit to the
zone of Tripoli, and that gave me a conviction as to all
the possibilities for improvements that can be extended
to the entire colony. There are zones in Garian which
can compete in production and fertility with the better
zones of southern Italy. The same can be said about the

260

My Autobiography

high plain of Cirenaica. In this last region I have abol­
ished a curious form of parliament created by the weak­
ness of our former governments. Now the governors
enjoy complete influence and complete responsibility
for the welfare of nations and Italians. These regions
are pacified. Immigration continues to go there. Capital
goes; laborers go.
These two colonies alone cannot solve our population
problem. Mark this well. But with good-will and with
the help of the typical colonizing qualities of Italians,
we can give value to two regions which once were owned
by Rome and which must grow to the greatness of their
past and contribute to the new and greatly expanding
possibilities of our general economic progress.
Into these labors to rebuild Italy’s peaceful position
before the world, and to develop as duty dictates every
colonial possibility which may help to solve our popula­
tion problems, I have put my days and some of my
sleepless nights. But it would he absurd to suppose that
life was quite so easy for me as to allow me to stop with
international and colonial questions.
Let us turn to the amazing and dramatic financial
situation.
A leader of the Liberal party in parliament, Peano,
six months before the March on Rome, had defined the
deficit of our budget by a figure of more than six bil­
lions !
The financial situation was then, according even to
the declaration of our opponents, desperately serious. I
knew what a difficult inheritance I had received. It had

New Paths

261

come down to me as a legacy from the errors and weak­
nesses of those who had preceded me. In fact, I fully
understood that with such an important leak in the hull
of the Ship of State, any great voyage of progress
would be impossible. Finance, then, was one of the most
ilclieate and urgent problems to be solved, if I wanted
lo rebuild and elevate our credit abroad and at home.
There were many demands due and waiting; neces­
sity had turned the printing presses to the production of
new paper-money, driving down and down the value of
Italian currency. An irresponsible and demagogic pol­
icy had been followed, which had brought about com­
plex makeshifts. These not only affected the soundness
of the budget, but also were undermining all our eco­
nomic life and the whole efficiency of the state.
I had to deal a smashing blow to useless expendiI u res, and to those who sought tribute from the trea­
sury. I had to rake up tax-slackers. I had to establish
severest economy in every branch of state administraI ion. I had to put a brake on the endless increase of em­
ployees. Furthermore, the obligation of settling our
debts to foreign powers was staring me in the face.
I'’.von if our resources were limited, this supreme act of
wisdom and honesty had to be performed.
II goes without discussion that for states as for individual citizens, when a debt has been signed and ac­
knowledged it must be paid, and faith must be kept as
lo obligations undertaken.
For this work I picked a capable man; I appointed as
Minister of Finance the Honorable De Stefani, a Fas­

262

My Autobiography

cist and a Doctor of Political Economy. He was able to
curtail expenses, repress abuses, and create new sources
of revenue and taxes; in this way the budget was almost
balanced within two years.
I demobolized all the economic organization left over
from war time; I eliminated the useless bureaucracy of
the new provinces, still burdened by the debts and in­
demnities of war. I settled all these with an issue of
bonds, quickly subscribed.
Before launching a policy of severe economy, I
wanted to do full justice to the invalids of the war. I
fixed, with special privileges and without regard to
economy, the obligations that the state was to assume
in their favor and in favor of the orphans and widows
of those who had died in battle. After having repaired in
this way a cruel wrong, and fulfilled a duty toward those
who had given their life and their blood to the country,
it was easy for me to strike at certain forms of exag­
gerated and sudden wealth derived from war profits.
There is no doubt that I have been very harsh in this
matter. But why not? These unjust pocketbook privi­
leges represented an offense against those who had suf­
fered for the war, suffered not only in misery or death,
but also in loss of money and property.
While striving to eliminate all that burdened the
economy and finance of the state, I tried to promote
individual production to the greatest degree. I had to
respect honestly accumulated wealth, and make every­
body understand the value, not only economic but also
moral, of inheritance transmittable in families. Because

New Paths

263

of this, though I had approved a tax reform of great
importance, I restored many basic rights, such as the
right of succession.
It was made clear that I would never approve sub­
jecting inheritance to a taxation which had almost as­
sumed a socialistic character of expropriation. Interfer­
ence with succession strikes a blow at the institution of
the family. I aroused controversies, but at last my de­
cision was understood and accepted by the people.
Who knows better than I that the discipline displayed
by the Italian people has been worthy of my admira­
tion and of the respect of the world. We have no great
natural resources. Nevertheless our citizens subjected
themselves to the pressure of taxation so thoroughly
that toward the end of 1924 minister De Stefani was
able not only to announce to the chamber the balancing
of our budget, but also to foresee a surplus of one hun­
dred and seventy millions for the fiscal year 1925-26.
I consider that the corner-stone of all governmental
policies is a wise and strong financial policy. And now,
supported by the soundness of the budget, this policy
was an accomplished fact. The state, through able ad­
ministration and the disciplined patience of Italian tax­
payers, was able to face all its obligations, to liquidate
its liabilities and, in 1925 and 1926, to discuss with
Washington and London the complex problems of war
debts.
We were out of the hole.
We did not stop with the central government. The
state, now self-assured, with its finances reordered, was

264

My Autobiography

able, by the strength of its example, to give precise rules
for the restoration of the finances of the self-governing
units in communes and provinces. But even that was
not enough; we had to review the financial situation of
many a corporation and industry. Generally, this in­
cluded all those industries which were quoted on the
stock exchange.
By one of those phenomena of national and interna­
tional speculations, which are not infrequent in modern
life, many of our industrial stocks and even govern­
ment bonds had risen to figures which were hyperboli­
cal and inconceivable, if one considered the relation that
should exist between the value of our lira and its pur­
chasing power in regard to gold.
Even in Italy, a wise and honest country, in which
excessive speculation was never rampant, and in which
the stock exchange was never the object of excessive
and unchecked interest from any class of citizens, there
arose a madness for stock exchange gambling. Many
people, naturally, lost their heads. They shattered
patrimonies, caused scandals, provoked bankruptcies;
but this was not sufficient to stop the sudden craze
for speculation. The Minister of Finance then decided
to take steps to watch and to limit the activities of the
exchanges. It was necessary to take really serious mea­
sures, which of course would run counter to old and
rooted business traditions. Perhaps they were too sud­
den and too unexpected. They provoked in the middle
and financial class an opposition which created a dis­
turbance in all markets.

New Paths

265

I was following the course of these events. This sud­
den opposition created by economic and not by political
causes might, as was shown afterward, become a real
danger, but it gave me a very important field for ex­
perience and observations. I brought a counter offensive
and tamed those who made the attacks. A more rational
policy was instituted but we conceded nothing to the
speculators. After a while De Stefani resigned. Volpi
succeeded him. In the meantime, after this first diffi­
culty had been dealt with, I concentrated my attention
on the war debts.
After settling the state budget and balancing it, I
knew that I had come to the task of making an agree­
ment with the United States of America and with Eng­
land on the reduction of our war debt. I sent a delega­
tion to Washington. The leaders were Count Volpi and
the Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs, Grandi. I feel
that the negotiations were carried on with great ability.
We arrived, I believe, at an agreement that satisfied the
American public and safeguarded the interests of Italy.
On January 27th, 1926, by an analogous agreement,
with slight modifications due to the different relations
that existed between us and England, we were able to
settle also our English debts. America and England
ratified the agreements; and so did we, with pride, be­
cause it is our constant, firm rule, in all our private or
public affairs, to keep faith with our given word and to
pay to our full ability the last cent we owe, without
wailing or complaint.
Then came a gesture of spontaneous national patri­

266

My Autobiography

otism: our people by public subscription and without
the help of the state paid the first installment due the
government of the United States!
I believed then that the security of the budget and
the agreements of Washington and London would be
sufficient evidence to reassure our industrial, commer­
cial and banking classes as to the soundness of the finan­
cial policy of the government. I hoped that it would
lead to a gradual revaluation of all our currency and
credit in national and international markets.
Unfortunately, all which appeared to me to grow out
of convincing logic did not follow. In the first six
months of 1926, we were losing an average of ten points
in relation to the pound. The pound sterling naturally
was towing all the other privileged currencies in such
a way that, at a time when our credit should have been
on the upgrade, we were witnessing an opposite phe­
nomenon. Our private economic life was getting thin­
ner and less stable; it was becoming fickle and incon­
stant, through a gradual inflation which might delude
many industrial centres of northern Italy, but was cer­
tainly not satisfying to the middle class and to the Ital­
ians who saved money.
It was necessary to give a point of support to this gay
finance. It was inconceivable that an orderly, quiet, dis­
ciplined state, which had no public agitation as a liabil­
ity and which worked with tenacity, faith and pride,
should abandon these wholesome forces and assets to the
mercy of shark speculators and parasites, eager to en­
rich themselves on the depreciation of the lira, ready to

New Paths

267

accept willingly or even to quicken a general bank­
ruptcy so as not to be obliged to settle their private
debts, or to face their obligations toward depositors in
their banks. A betrayal of the Italian people was being
plotted by a class of unworthy citizens. It was a serious
betrayal and an injury to moral character, because a
ruined people cannot readily be born again in the credit
of the world.
I studied for a long time the complex phenomenon
of state, private, and individual finance. I was making
a comparison between our own economic phase and the
situation of analogous countries. I was watching closely
the statistical data of our commercial balance. I had in
my hand all the evidence for a sure and positive judg­
ment, and was ready to say the word which would influ­
ence, in a clear and decisive way, the economic life of
Italy.
Thus it happened that in August, 1926, in a square
of a beautiful town of central Italy at Pesaro, I made
a speech which was to become famous and which was
destined to mark the beginning of the revaluation of
the lira and our starting-point toward a gold basis.
I had decided for some time to speak out with candor
to the Italian people. Foreign exchange had revealed
a weakness in our credit abroad. Instability every day,
under a regime of giddy and disastrous finance, was a
sign of underground work. I had to put speculation
back to the wall with a slam. I had to face and defeat
that part of a certain class who would have pushed the
nation toward bankruptcy. The government could not

268

My Autobiography

ignore them or their machinations. It was not only a
matter touching the financial future of the country; the
very flag of the Italian people was being jeopardized.
In fact, in certain situations, even the soundness of a
currency can assume the dignity of a flag and must be
defended by every open means. One cannot entrench
oneself behind ignorance when the patrimony and the
dignity of an entire people is being threatened.
Fascism, which had put discipline into the nation,
had to put its firm hand on that class of short-sighted
speculators who wanted to bring to nothing the value
of our currency. Fascism, which had won on the politi­
cal line, now faced, as I could well see, a defeat if it did
not intervene energetically in the financial field.
In this plot against us were joined all the strength
of the international anti-Fascists spurred and aroused
by our eternal foes, inside Italy and out. I understood
that combined with this problem of honesty and recti­
tude, there was also a problem of will. So I spoke. Here
is the essence of my speech:
You must not be surprised if I make a political declara­
tion of definite importance. It is not the first time that I
have addressed to the people directly, without any official
apparatus, my convictions and my decisions. I must always
be trusted, but especially when I am speaking to the people,
looking into its eyes and listening to the beating of its
heart. I am speaking to you, but in this moment I am speak­
ing to all Italians and my voice for obvious reasons will cer­
tainly have an echo behind the Alps, and overseas. Let me
tell you that I will defend the Italian lira to the last gasp! I
will never subject the marvellous Italian people, which for

New Paths

269

four years has worked with ascetic discipline, and is ready
for other and harder sacrifices, to the moral shame and eco­
nomic catastrophe of the bankruptcy of the lira.
The Fascist regime will resist with all its strength the
attempts to suffocate Italy being made by inimical finan­
cial forces. We will squash them as soon as they are identi­
fied at home. The lira, which is the sign of our economic life,
the symbol of our long sacrifices and of our tenacious work,
will be defended and it will be firmly defended—and at any
cost! When I go among a people that really works, I feel
that in speaking this way I interpret sincerely its sentiment,
its hopes, and its will.
Citizens and Black Shirts! I have already pronounced the
most important part of my speech, destined to dissipate the
fogs of uncertainty and to weaken the eventual attempts of
troublesome defeatism.
My sentences were like whip-lashes for all the specu­
lators hidden in the bourses. The great financial institu­
tions understood that it was not possible to adopt in­
dependent policies without having to reckon with the
government. Speculators perceived that they had fallen
into a trap.
On the other hand, I did not want to confine myself
to words. In the council of the ministers on Septem­
ber first, I adopted measures which were to guarantee
my financial policies. These measures can be summed
up: transfer of the Morgan loan of ninety millions of
dollars to the Bank of Italy; regularization of the ac­
counts between the state and the Bank of Italy; re­
duction of two billion, five hundred millions of the cir­
culation on account of the state; liquidation of the
autonomistic section of the Consorzio Valori.

270

My Autobiography

To all this was to be added a broad simplification of
taxation with abolition of certain taxes and a new form
of protection for thrift and for banking activities.
In November I floated a loan that I called “The Littorio.” It was intended to facilitate cash operations and
to give some elasticity to the budget. Since there was
a very heavy floating debt, represented by treasury
bonds, I decided upon redemption of these bonds and
their inscription in the great book of the public debt.
These provisions had without doubt a harsh character;
they were full of sacrifice. But when the moment and
its discomfort had passed, we were able to start on a
policy of wise severity; our lira began to climb gradu­
ally on the markets of London and Washington and
our credit rose again in every part of the world.
To be sure, the passage from a giddy to an austere
finance which I had inaugurated with the Pesaro speech
was not without its difficulties. Failures and heavy
losses were brought about. Business deals begun while
the lira was at one hundred and thirty to the pound
were closed with the lira at ninety. All this brought with
it unavoidable losses which hit hardest those who were
the least strong and resistant financially.
The difficulties in returning to a position of financial
dignity and austerity were notable; reconstruction was
as difficult as inflation had been easy. We had to reduce
the budget and state bonds to their simplest expression;
we had to start a policy of demobilization of our debts
to be able to know our complex financial burden and to
determine exactly the interest that had to be paid every
year.

New Paths

271

But the situation has been cleared and bettered. In
order to have a sounder, readier, more agile organiza­
tion, I had decided on the unification of all the institu­
tions issuing paper money. Only the Bank of Italy has
the power to issue paper money; the Bank of Naples
and the Bank of Sicily returned to their original func­
tions of guardians and stimulators of the agricultural
economic life of southern Italy.
When, after a year of notable difficulties, the finan­
cial situation of the budget and of Italian economy had
been cleared, I was able to address myself, in 1927, to
the new gold basis of the lira, on concrete foundations.
In December, 1927, at a meeting of the council of min­
isters, I was able to announce to the Italian people that
the lira was back on a gold basis, on a ratio which tech­
nicians and profound experts in financial questions have
judged sound.
I felt the pride of a victor. I had not only led the
Black Shirts and political forces, but I had solved a
complex and difficult problem of national finance, such
a problem as sometimes withdraws itself beyond the
will and the influence of any political man, and becomes
subjected to the tyranny and mechanism of mere ma­
terial relations under the influence of various and in­
finite factors. Only a profound knowledge of the eco­
nomic life and structure of a people can reach, in such
an insidious field, conclusions which will be able to sat­
isfy the great majority.
To-day we have a balanced budget. Self-ruling units,
the provinces and the communes, have balanced their

272

My Autobiography

budgets too. Exports and imports and their relationship
are carried in a precise and definite rhythm—that of
our stabilized lira. Through solidity and certainty,
Fascist Italy is creating a new Italian regime, while the
necessary complement of our general policy and the es­
sence of our state organization is being supplied by a
new corporative system.

CHAPTEK XII

THE

FASCIST

STATE

AND

THE

FUTURE

~ 'ID the innovations and experiments of the new
Fascist civilization, there is one which is of in­
terest to the whole world; it is the corporative
organization of the state.
Let me assert at once that before we reached this
form of state organization, one which I now consider
rounded out, the steps we took were long, and our re­
search, analysis and discussion have been exhaustive.
Both the experience and the tests have been full of les­
sons.
Practical reality itself has been the navigator. First
of all, we must remember that the corporative organi­
zation was not born from a desire to create mere jurid­
ical institutions; in my opinion, it grew out of the
special necessities of the Italian situation in particular,
and out of those necessities which would be general in
any situation where there is economic restriction, and
where traditions of work and production have not yet
been developed by experience and time. Italy, in its
first half-century of united political renaissance, has
seen classes armed one against the other, not only be­
cause of the desire of one to master the other in politi­
cal control but also because of the struggle for the lim­
ited resources that our surface soil and what was
273

274

My Autobiography

beneath it might be put at the disposition of those who
were interested in work and production.
Opposed to the directing middle class, there was an­
other class which I will call, for more easy reference,
proletarian. It was influenced by Socialists and anarch­
ists, in an eternal and never-ending struggle with the
directing class.
Every year there was a general strike; every year the
fertile Po Valley, for instance, was subjected to re­
curring agitations which imperiled crops and all pro­
duction. Opposed to that humane sense of harmony
which should be a duty upon citizens of the same Fath­
erland, there was a chronic struggle of interests, egged
on by the professional Socialists, the syndicalist organi­
zers, a struggle against a middle class which, in turn,
persisted in its position of negation and of expectation
of a messiah. Civil life did not move a decisive step for­
ward on the way toward betterment.
A country like ours, which has no rich resources in
the earth, which has mountains for half of its area, can­
not have great economic possibilities. If, then, the citi­
zens become naturally quarrelsome, if classes have a ten­
dency to strive to annihilate each other, civil life can
have none of that rhythm necessary for developing a
modern people. The Liberal and Democratic state, in
spite of upheavals, recurrent every year, and even at
every season, held to a noncommital stand, selecting a
characteristic slogan: “Neither reaction, nor revolu­
tion,”-—as if that phrase had a precise or, indeed, any
meaning whatsoever!

The Fascist State and the Future 275
It was necessary to emerge from the base, clannish
habit of class competition and to put aside hates and
enmities. After the war, especially following the sub­
versive propaganda of Lenin, ill-will had reached peri­
lous proportions. Agitations and strikes usually were ac­
companied by fights, with dead and wounded men as the
result. The people went back to work with souls full
of hate against the class of the masters, which, rightly
or wrongly, was considered so idiotically lacking in
vision as to surpass in this regard any other middle class
in the world. Between the peasants and the rising in­
dustry of the urban centres there were also the phe­
nomena of unmistakable misunderstanding. All of our
life was dominated by demagogy. Every one was dis­
posed to tolerate, to pretend to understand, to make con­
cessions to the violence of the crowd. But after every
incident of disorder, some new situation promised an­
other and-even more difficult problem of conflict.
It was necessary, in my opinion, to create a political
atmosphere which would allow men in government to
have some degree of courage, to speak harsh truths, to
affirm rights, only after having exacted duties, and, if
necessary, imposing these duties. Liberalism and De­
mocracy were only attempted remedies of milk-andwater character; they exhausted their energies in the
halls of parliament. Leading that agitation were em­
ployees of the state, railroad men and postmen and
troublesome elements. The authority of the state was a
kitten handled to death. In such a situation, mere pity
and tolerance would have been criminal. Liberalism and

276

My Autobiography

Democracy, which had abdicated their duty at every
turn, failed utterly to appraise and adjust the rights
and duties of the various classes in Italian life. Fascism
has done it!
The fact is that five years of harmonious work have
transformed in its very essentials the economic life and,
in consequence, the political and moral life of Italy.
Let me add that the discipline that I have imposed is
not a forced discipline; it is not born from preconceived
ideas, does not obey the selfish interests of groups and
of classes. Our discipline has one vision and one end—
the welfare and the good name of the Italian nation.
The discipline that I have imposed is enlightened dis­
cipline. The humble classes, because they are more nu­
merous and perhaps more deserving of solicitude, are
nearest to my heart as a responsible leader. I have seen
the men from the countryside in the trenches, and I
have understood how much the nation owes to the
healthy people of calloused hands. On the other hand,
our industrial workers have qualities of sobriety, genial­
ity, stamina, which feed the pride of one who must rule
and lead a people. The middle Italian class, too, includ­
ing the rural class, is much better than its reputation.
Our problems arise from a variety and diversity among
the various economic interests, which makes difficult the
formation of great national groups of producers. None
of the Italian producing groups, however, can be rated
as “vampires,” as they were rated in the superficial
terminology of the old Socialist demagogy. The state is
no longer ignorant when it confronts facts and the in­

The Fascist State and the Future 277
terests of the various classes. Not only does it obviate
strife—it tries to find out the origins of clashes and con­
flicts. By statistics and the help of studious men, we
now are able to define what will be the great issues of
to-morrow. In the meantime, with the aid not only of
the government, but of the bodies locally organized for
consultation, we can know precisely what are to be the
outlines of the productive programmes of to-morrow.
I have wanted the Fascist government, above all, to
give great care to the social legislation needed to carry
out our part of agreed international programmes for
industry and for those who bear the future of industry.
I think that Italy is advanced beyond all the European
nations; in fact, it has ratified the laws for the eighthour day, for obligatory insurance, for regulation of
the work of women and children, for assistance and
benefit, for after-work diversion and adult education,
and finally for obligatory insurance against tubercu­
losis. All this shows how, in every detail in the field of
labor, I stand by the Italian working classes. All that
it was possible to do without working an injury to the
principle of solidity in our economy I have set out to
do, from the minimum wage to the continuity of em­
ployment, from insurance against accidents to indem­
nity against illness, from old age pensions to the proper
regulation of military service. There is little which so­
cial welfare research has adjudged practical to national
economy or wise for social happiness which has not al­
ready been advanced by me. I want to give to every man
and woman so generous an opportunity that work will

278

My Autobiography

be not a painful necessity but a joy of life. But even
such a complex programme cannot be said to equal the
creation of the corporative system. Nor can the latter
equal something even larger. Beyond the corporative
system, beyond the state’s labors, is Fascism, harmonizer and dominator of Italian life, standing ever as its
inspiration.
In 1923, some months after the march on Rome, I
insisted on the ratification of the law for an eight-hour
day. All the masses which had seen a friend in the legis­
lative policy of Fascism gave their approval to national
syndicalism. Instead of the old professional syndicates
we substituted Fascist corporations. In a meeting of
December 19, 1923, I had occasion to affirm that:
“Peace within is primarily a task of government. The
government has a clear outline of conduct. Public or­
der must never be troubled for any reason whatsoever.
That is the political side. But there is also the economic
side; it is one of collaboration. There are other prob­
lems, such as that of exportation. I remind Italian in­
dustry of these principles. Until now it has been too
individualistic. The old system and old ways must be
abandoned.”
A little further on I said: “Over all conflicts of hu­
man and legitimate interests, there is the authority of
the government; the government alone is in the right
position to see things from the point of view of the gen­
eral welfare. This government is not at the disposition
of this man or that man; it is over everybody, because
it takes to itself not only the juridical conscience of the

The Fascist State and the Future 279
nation in the present, but also all that the nation rep­
resents for the future. The government has shown that
it values at the highest the productive strength of the
nation. A government which follows these principles
has the right to be listened to by every one. It has a task
to fulfill. It will do it. It will do it inexorably for the
defense of the moral and material interests of the na­
tion.”
Little by little, the old labor structure and associa­
tions were abandoned. We were directed more and more
toward the corporative conception of the state. I did
not want to take away from labor one of its holidays,
and so, instead of the first of May, which had foreign
origins and the imprint of Socialist internationalism, I
fixed on a gay and glorious date in Italian life, April
21st, the birthday of Rome. Rome is the city which has
given legislation to the world. The Roman law is still
the text which governs the relations of civil life. To
celebrate a Labor Day, I could not have selected a more
suggestive and worthy date.
To bring into being, in a precise co-ordination, all the
measures that I had undertaken and that Fascism and
the Corporations had brought about, in all their com­
plexity, I had the Grand Council approve a document.
I do not hesitate to declare it to be of historical charac­
ter: it is the Labor Charter.
It is composed of thirty paragraphs, each of which
contains a fundamental truth. From the paramount ne­
cessity for production arises the need of an equitable
sharing of products, the need of the judgment of

280

My Autobiography

tribunals in case of discord, and, finally, the need of
protective legislation.
That document has been welcomed by all the classes
of Italy. The labor magistracy represents, in its conse­
cration to duty, something worthy of a strong state, in
contrast to the cloudy aspirations in the misty realms of
high-sounding Liberalism, Democracy and communis­
tic fantasy. The framing and realization were the tasks
of Fascism. Old men of the socialist and syndicalist
poses and postures were amazed and perplexed at the
daring new reform. Another legend fell: Fascism was
not the protector of any one class, but a supreme regu­
lator of the relations between all citizens of a state. The
Labor Charter found interpreters and attracted the at­
tention of the studious in every part of the world. It
became a formidable pillar of the new constitution of the
Fascist State.
As a logical consequence of the Charter of Labor and
of all the social legislation and of the magistracy of la­
bor, came the necessity of instituting the Corporations.
In this institution are concentrated all the branches of
national production. Work in all its complex manifes­
tations and in all its breadth, whether of manual or of
intellectual nature, requires equally protection and
nourishment. The citizen in the Fascist State is no
longer a selfish individual who has the anti-social right
of rebelling against any law of the Collectivity. The
Fascist State with its corporative conception puts men
and their possibilities into productive work and inter­
prets for them the duties they have to fulfil.

The Fascist State and the Future 281
In this new conception, which has found its logical
expression in our representative forms, the citizen is val­
uable because of his productivity, his work and his
thought, and not merely because he is twenty-one years
old and has the right to vote!
In the corporative state all national activities are re­
flected. It was logical that syndicalistic organizations
should become a part also of the new representative in­
stitutions. From this need, imposed by a new political
and social reality, arose the reform of national politi­
cal representation. Not only does the new political di­
rectorate select its candidates with regard for their ca­
pabilities and for the number of citizens represented,
but it is complemented by the work of selection and val­
uation devoted by the Grand Fascist Council to the task
of creating the best, the most stable, the most truly rep­
resentative and the most expert national board of di­
rectors.
We have solved a series of problems of no little ex­
tent and importance; we have abolished all those peren­
nial troubles and disorders and doubts that poisoned our
national soul. We have given rhythm, law, and protec­
tion to Work: we have found in the co-operation of
classes the evidence of our possibilities, of our future
power. We do not waste time in brawls and strikes,
which, while they vex the spirit, imperil our strength
and the solidity of our economy. We regard strife as a
luxury for the rich. We must conserve our strength.
We have exalted work as productive strength; therefore
we have the majority of these elements represented in

282

My Autobiography

the legislative body, and this body is a more worthy and
a stronger helmsman for Italian life.
And Capital is not exiled, as in the Russian commu­
nistic dream; we consider it an increasingly important
actor in the drama of production.
In this, my Autobiography, I have emphasized more
than once the fact that I have always tried to weave an
organic and coherent character into all the fabric of my
political work. I have not confined myself to giving
merely an outward veneer or contour to Italian life; I
wished to influence the very depths of its spirit. I
founded my work on facts and on the real conditions of
the Italian people; from such realistic activity I drew
valuable lessons. I have been able to bring about use­
ful, immediate results looking toward a new future for
our country.
One of the reforms which I have promoted and have
closely followed in all its successive developments is the
reorganization of the schools. This has been called the
Gentile Reform, after the name of the Minister of Pub­
lic Instruction, whom I appointed immediately follow­
ing the March on Rome. The gravity and importance of
school problems cannot escape the attention of any mod­
ern statesman mindful of the destiny of his people. The
School must be considered in all its complete expres­
sion. Public schools, Intermediate schools, University
institutions, all exercise a profound influence on the
trend—both moral and economic—of the life of any na­
tion. From the beginning this has been ever in my mind.

The Fascist State and the Future 283
Perhaps my early experience as a school teacher in­
creased an unvarying interest in youth and its develop­
ment. In Italy there were traditions of higher culture,
but the public schools had become degraded because of
lack of means and, above all, because of lack of spiritual
vision.
Although the percentage of illiteracy tended to di­
minish and even to disappear in certain regions, partic­
ularly in Piedmont, the citizens nevertheless were not
getting from the school world those broad educational
foundations—physical, intellectual and moral—that are
possible and humane. The intermediate schools were too
crowded because everybody was admitted, even those
without merit, through endless sessions of examinations
which were reduced often to a spiritless formality. We
lacked intelligent systems of selection and vocational
and educational valuation of individuals. The mill
ground on and on, turning out stock patterns of human
beings who ended for the most part by taking tasks in
bureaucracy. They lowered the function of the public
service by dead and not living personnel. Universities
created other puppets in the so-called “free arts,” such
as law and medicine.
It was time that the delicate machinery which was of
such consequence in the spiritual life of the nation be
renewed in a precise, definite, organic form. We had to
crowd out from the intermediate schools the negative
and supercilious elements. We were determined to in­
fuse into the public schools those broad humanistic cur­
rents in which our history and our traditions are so rich.

284

My Autobiography

Finally, it was indispensable to impose a new discipline
in education—a discipline to which every one must sub­
mit, the teachers themselves first of all!
To be sure, teachers draw a very modest wage in
Italy, and this is a problem that I am resolved to face
and solve as soon as the condition of the budget will
allow. Nevertheless, I cannot permit a limited, pinchpenny treatment of education. The niggardly policy is
of old and typically Liberal and Democratic origin. It
furnished teachers with a good pretext for performing
their duties indifferently and for abandoning themselves
to subversive thought, even against the state itself. This
condition reached its climax in the humiliating fact that
many teachers deserted their posts. We had had clamor­
ous examples of such a tendency, not only in the elemen­
tary schools, but also in some of the universities.
Fascism put a stop to all this by making discipline su­
preme, discipline both for the high and for the low, par­
ticularly for those who had the high duty of teaching
order and discipline and of maintaining the highest con­
cepts of human service in the various schools of the
regime.
We had an old school law which took its name from
Minister Casati, a law that had been enacted in 1859
and had remained the fundamental law even after the
successive retouching of Ministers Coppino, Daneo, and
Credaro. We had to renew and refashion it, through the
ardent will of our Party; we had to give it a broad
didactic and moral vision; we had to infuse into it a
spirit of vital rebirth which would appeal to the new

The Fascist State and the Future 285
Italy. Great ideas and great revolutions always create
the right hour for the solution of many problems. The
school problem, which had dragged on for many dec­
ades, has finally found its solution in the Gentile Re­
form. This is not the place to explain the reform in
detail. I want to indicate, however, those fundamental
principles which I myself discussed and settled in a few
compact discussions with the Minister of Public In­
struction. They can he summarized by the following
points:
1st—The state provides schooling only for those who
deserve it because of their merits and leaves to other
initiatives students who are not entitled to a place in the
state’s schools.
This throws on the scrap heap the democratic concept
which considered a state school as an institution for
every one—a basket into which treasure and waste were
piled together. The middle class had regarded the school
as at its service and therefore did not respect it. They
demanded only the greatest possible indulgence in or­
der to achieve as quickly as they could their purely
utilitarian aims, such as a degree or a perfunctory pass­
ing to promotions.
2nd—The students of the state schools and of the in­
dependent schools find themselves under equal condi­
tions when taking the state examinations, before com­
mittees appointed by the government.
Thus is encouraged the regime of independent schools
analogous to those of England. This regime is advan­
tageous for the Catholics, owners of many schools, but

286

My Autobiography

displeases the anti-clericals of the old style. It allows me
a free development of scholastic initiative outside of the
conventional lines.
3rd—The state watches over the independent schools
and promotes a rivalry between independent and state
schools which raises the cultural level and the general
atmosphere of all schools.
The state does not see its jurisdiction diminished be­
cause of the independent schools; on the contrary, it
extends its watchfulness over all schools.
4th—Admission to the intermediate schools is now
possible only through examinations. The schools are di­
rected toward a broad humanistic cidture, but with a
standard of scholarship which has eliminated forever the
disorder and the easy-going ways of the old democratic
schools.
By means of these and other reforms the elementary
school comes to have two distinct but co-ordinated pur­
poses. One is that of preparation for the intermediate
schools, and the other is a high type of broad popular
education complete in itself.
The intermediate schools were broadened by means of
the following institutions:
(a) Complementary schools. The abolished technical
school, complete in itself, was revived along new lines.
(b) .Technical institutes of higher specialization.
(c) Scientific Lyceum, still higher, taking the place
of the abolished “Modern Lyceum” and of the PhysicoMathematical departments of the Technical Institute,
and preparing the students for the scientific branches of
the University.

The Fascist State and the Future 287
(d) Teachers’ Institute, a purely humanistic and
philosophical school taking the place of the abolished
complementary and normal schools.
(e) Women’s Lyceum, a general culture school, com­
plete in itself.
(f) Classical Lyceum, unchanged in its essential
lines, but augmented by the humanistic character of the
studies; to it the task of preparing for most university
branches has been assigned. To enter the universities,
entrance examinations have been instituted. The final
examinations of the intermediate schools, of the Clas­
sical and the Scientific Lyceum, have been termed Ma­
turity Examinations; all the curricula have been re­
newed, fitting them for a more modern culture. Latin
has been restored in all schools except in the Comple­
mentary and Religious Departments of the elementary
and intermediate schools.
For all these different types of institutions, one es­
sential rule has been put into practice, that is, every
school must be a unit organism, with a set number of
classes and students; the candidates may enter through
a graduated classification, based on the examinations;
those who are not admitted must go to independent
schools.
The application of this reform, which overthrew the
old interests, the old ideas and especially the utilitarian
spirit of the population, aroused an unavoidable spirit
of ill-feeling. It was used by the opposition press, espe­
cially by the Corriere della Sera, for controversial pur­
poses ; but the reform has been put through with energy

288

My Autobiography

under my direction and has marked the beginning of a
real rebirth of the Italian schools and of the Italian
culture.
The reform of the universities has been co-ordinated
with the reforms in the primary and intermediate
schools. Its purpose is to divide the university students
into different organic institutions, without useless over­
lapping. The rule of state examinations is imposed also
for the universities, to which both the students of the
state and independent schools can be admitted. The In­
stitute of “Libera Docenza,” authorities independently
attached to certain faculties of the universities, has also
been reformed, appointment no longer being made by
the individual departments but by central committees
in Rome.
On the occasion of a visit by the delegations of the
Fascist university groups, I had the opportunity of de­
claring that the Gentile Reform “is the most revolu­
tionary of all the reforms which we have voted on, be­
cause it has completely transformed a state of affairs
which had lasted since 1859.”
I was the son of a school-mistress; I myself was
taught in the elementary and secondary schools. I knew,
therefore, the school problem. Because of that, I had
wanted to bring it to a concrete conclusion. The Italian
school again will take its deserved place in the world.
From our university chairs, true scientists and poets will
again illuminate Italian thought, while the secondary
schools will provide technical and executive elements for
our population, and the public schools will create a back-

Tne Fascist State and the Future 289
ground of civic education and collective virtue in the
masses.
I have willed that, in collaboration with the universi­
ties, departments of Fascist economics, of corporative
law, and a whole series of fruitful institutes of Fascist
culture, should be created. Thus a purely scholastic and
academic world is being permeated by Fascism, which is
creating a new culture through the fervid and complex
activity of real, of theoretical and of spiritual experi­
ences.
But, even closer to my heart than the Institutes of
Fascist universities, is a new institution which has all
the original marks of the Fascist revolution. It is the
National Organization of Balilla. Under the name of
a legendary little Genoese hero the new generation of
children and of youth was organized. These no longer
depend, as in the past, upon various playground asso­
ciations, scattered political schools and accessory insti­
tutions, but are trained through rigid but gay discipline
in gymnastic exercises and in the general rules of a wellordered national life. They are accustomed to obe­
dience and they are made to see a sure vision of the
future.
To show the importance that educational revival has
in my mind, I myself gave a lecture at the University
of Perugia. It has been pronounced by scholars as a
broadening of the world’s concept of its duty to youth.
Finally, to pay a tribute to culture and to higher cul­
ture, and to every one who, in the field of science, art,
and letters, has held high the name of Italy, I have ere-

290

My Autobiography

ated an Italian Academy, with a membership of “im­
mortals.”
The armed forces of the state had fallen into degra­
dation in the years 1919, 1920, 1921. The flower of our
race had been spurned and humiliated.
Conditions even reached a point where the Minister
of War in those “liberal” days had a circular distributed
advising officers not to appear in uniform in public, and
to refrain from carrying arms, in order not to be sub­
jected to the challenges of gangsters and hoodlums.
This aberration, which it is better to pass over quickly
for the sake of one’s country, was destined to find its
avenger in Fascism. It was one of the factors which
created an atmosphere passionately eager for change.
To-day, the spirit of the country is much different; to­
day the armed forces of the state are justly considered
the secure and worthy and honored defense of the na­
tion.
I had a very clear and decisive programme, when, in
1922, at the moment of the March on Rome, I selected
as my collaborators the best leaders of the Victory of
1918. General Armando Diaz, who after Vittorio Veneto had remained aloof in silence, overwhelmed by the
difficulty of the moment, and who had issued and had
been able to voice an indignant protest in the Senate
against the policies of Nitti’s Cabinet, had been selected
by me as Minister of War. I appoined Admiral Thaon
de Revel, the greatest leader of our war on the sea, as
Minister of the Navy. On January 5, 1923, General

The Fascist State and the Future 291
Diaz presented a complete programme of reform for
the army to the Council of Ministers. That was an his­
toric meeting; fundamental decisions for the renewal
of the armed forces were taken; and we were able to
announce to the country in solemn and explicit fashion
that, with that meeting, the army had been given new
life, to “accomplish the high mission that had been in­
trusted to it, in the supreme interests of the nation.”
I had fulfilled the first promise I had made to myself
and to the Italian people. Immediately after that I
dedicated myself to a reorganization of aviation, which
had been abandoned to utter decay by the former admin­
istrations. The task was not easy; everything had to be
done again. The landing fields, the machines, the pilots,
the organizers and the technicians all were restored. A
feeling of abandonment, of dejection and mistrust had
been diffused in Italy by the enemies of aviation; this
new type of armed force, many people thought, should
be developed only as a sport. Into this situation I put
my energy—I gave it personal attention, personal de­
votion. I have succeeded in my purpose: the successes of
De Pinedo, of Maddalena, the flights in squadrons, the
great manoeuvers, have demonstrated that Italian avia­
tion has recently acquired great expertness and pres­
tige, not only in Italy, but wherever there is air to fly in.
The same can be said of the navy, which has re­
ordered its formation, bettered its units, completed its
fleet, and made its discipline efficient. Fourth, but not
least, because of its spirit of emulation and daring,
comes the Voluntary Militia for the Safety of the Na­

292

My Autobiography

tion, divided into 160 Legions, commanded by distin­
guished officers and by enthusiastic Fascists. These are
magnificent shock troops.
Finally our barracks and our ships can be said to be,
in the true sense of the word, refuges of peace and
strength; the officers devote their activities to the physi­
cal and educational betterment of the men; the training
conforms to the modern technic of war. The army is
no longer distracted from its functions, as happened too
often under the old governments, in order to assume
ordinary duties of public order which were exhausting
and humiliating, and to which entire Divisions were as­
signed. I changed all this. For the last five years, the
army has left its barracks for its tactical manoeuvers and
for no other reason.
After some time, General Diaz had been obliged to
resign on account of the condition of his health. Gen­
eral Di Giorgio commanded ad interim. But later I saw
clearly the necessity of gathering all the armed forces
of the state under one direction. I assumed the port­
folios of War, Navy and Aeronautics. Thanks to this
programme, I have created a commander-in-chief of all
general staffs, who has the task of shaping, with a com­
plete vision of ensemble, all the plans of the various
branches of our forces toward one end: Victory. Our
military spirit is lively; it is not aggressive, but it will
not be taken by surprise. It is a peaceful spirit, but it
is watchful.
To complete the Fascist revival, it was necessary to
keep in mind also several lesser problems which, for

The Fascist State and the Future 293
the sake of the dignity and strength of the life of the
nation, were in need of an immediate solution.
The retired employees of the government, who re­
ceived very small pensions before the war, had seen with
alarm the value of their already meager resources di­
minish because of the successive depreciations of the
currency. I had to make a provision of some exceptional
nature for their protection, by making their pensions
adequate to the necessities of the day and to the cur­
rent value of money. I made a provision favoring the
clergy also; it was a question of a just and necessary
disposition. This would have been inconceivable in the
days of the Masonic demagogy and social democracy,
which was dominated by a superficial and wrathful anti­
clericalism. Our clergy number about 60,000 in Italy.
They are extraneous to the controversy, which I may
call historical, between State and Church. They accom­
plish a wise task and assist the Italian people in all their
religious practices, without meddling with political
questions, especially since the rise of Fascism. They are
reluctant to debase the spiritual character of their mis­
sion. The intriguing priest, of course, has to be fought.
Instead, the priest who accomplishes his task according
to the wise rules of the Gospel and shows the people the
great humane and divine truths, will be helped and as­
sisted. Because many of them were living in poverty,
we took general measures to better the conditions of
their existence.
The policy in regard to public works in Italy had al­
ways had an electoral tinge; public works to be done

294

My Autobiography

were decided upon here and there, not according to an
organic plan or to any plain necessity, but to give spo­
radic satisfaction to this or that group of voters. I
stopped this legalized favoritism. I instituted Bureaus
of Public Works, intrusting them to persons in whom
I have complete confidence, who obey only the central
power of the state, and are immune from pressure by
local interests. In this way I was able to better appre­
ciably the conditions of the roads of the South; I
mapped out a programme for aqueducts, railroads and
ports. All that is just finds in the Italian bureaucracy
an immediate comprehension. All the offices of govern­
mental character have received a new impulse and new
prestige. The great public utilities of the state, rail­
roads, mails, telegraph, telephone, the monopolies, func­
tion again. Certain persons are even sarcastic about the
new regularity. And this is easily explained: we should
not forget that the Italian people has been for many
years rebellious against any discipline; it was accus­
tomed to use its easy-to-hand and clamorous complaints
against the work and activity of the government. Some
vestiges of the mental attitudes of bygone days still
come to the surface. There is even whining because there
is efficiency and order in the world. Certain individualis­
tic ambitions would like to slap at our strong achieve­
ments of discipline and regularity. But to-day the state
is not an abstract and unknowing entity; the govern­
ment is present everywhere, every day. He who lives in
the ambit of the state or outside the state feels in every
way the majesty of law. It is not a thing of small mo­

The Fascist State and the Future 295
ment that all public utilities are conducted with an effi­
ciency which I might call American, and that the Ital­
ian bureaucracy, proverbially slow, has become eager
and agile.
I have given particular attention to the Capital. Rome
is a universal city, dear to the heart of Italians and of
the whole world. It was great in the time of the Roman
Empire and has conserved a universal light. It was the
historical seat and the centre of diffusion of Christian­
ity. Rome is first of all a city with the aura of destiny
and history. It is the Capital of the New Italy. It is
the seat of Christianity. It has taught and will continue
to teach law and art to the whole world.
I could not refuse the resources necessary to make
this magnificent capital a city aesthetically beautiful,
politically ordered, and disciplined by a governor. With
its natural port of Ostia, with its new roads, it will be­
come one of the most orderly and clean cities of Europe.
By isolating the monuments of ancient Rome, the rela­
tion between the ancient Romans and the Italians is
made more beautiful and suggestive. This work of reval­
uation—almost recreation—of the capital was not car­
ried on to the detriment of other Italian cities. Each one
of them has the typical character of an ancient capital.
They are cities like Perugia, Milan, Naples, Florence,
Palermo, Bologna, Turin, Genoa, which have had a sov­
ereign history worthy of high respect; but none of them
thinks now to contest with Rome and its eternal glory.
Some writers who, as keen observers, have followed

296

My Autobiography

point by point the vicissitudes of our political life at a
certain moment raised an interesting question. Why did
not the National Fascist Party decree its own disband­
ment or slip into disorganization after the revolutionary
victory of October, 1922?
In order to answer this question it is necessary to
bring into relief certain essential points. History teaches
us that, normally, a revolutionary movement can be
channelled into legality only by means of forceful pro­
visions, directed, if necessary, against even the person­
nel of the movement. Every revolution assumes unfore­
seen and complex aspects; in certain historical hours,
the sacrifice of those who were the well-deserving lieu­
tenants of yesterday might become indispensable for
the supreme interest of to-morrow. Nevertheless, in my
own life I have never deliberately desired the sacrifice
of any one; therefore I have made use of the high influ­
ence which I have always had over my followers to
stop stagnation or heresies, personal interests and con­
tentions; I have preferred to prevent rather than to
repress.
But, when it has been necessary, I have shown my­
self to be inexorable. In fact, I had to keep in mind
that, when one party has shouldered the responsibility
of entire power, it has to know how to perform surgery
—and major operations, too—against secession. Be­
cause of my personal situation, having created the
Party, I have always dominated it. The sporadic cases
of secession, due not to differences of method but to
personal temperament, usually withered under the gen­

The Fascist State and the Future 297
eral loss of esteem and interest, and after the disclosure
of selfish ends.
This consciousness of my incontestable domination
has given me the ability to make the Party live on. But
other considerations also were opposed to the disband­
ment of the Party. First of all, a sentimental motif had
stamped itself upon my soul and upon the grateful
spirit of the nation. The Fascisti, particularly the
young, had followed me with blind, absolute, and pro­
found devotion. I had led them through the most dra­
matic vicissitudes, taking them away from universities,
from jobs, from factories. The young men had not hesi­
tated when confronted by danger. They had known how
to risk their future positions together with their lives
and fortunes. I owed and still owe to the militiamen of
previous days my strongest gratitude; to disband the
Party and retire would have been first of all an act of
utter ingratitude.
There was in the end a much more important reason.
I considered the formulation of a new Italian method
of government as one of the principal duties of Fascism.
It was to be created by the vigor of labor, through a
well-tested process of selection, without the risky crea­
tion of too many improvised military leaders. It was the
Party’s right to offer me men of our own regime to
assume positions of responsibility. In that sense the
Party was side by side with the government in the
ruling of the new regime. It had to abandon the pro­
gramme of violent struggle and yet preserve intact its
character of proud political intransigentism. Many ob­

298

My Autobiography

vious signs made me understand that it was not pos­
sible to patch the old with the new world. I had there­
fore need of reserves of men for the future. The Chief
of the government could very well be the Chief of the
Party, just as in every country of the world a repre­
sentative chief is always the exponent of an aristocracy
of wills.
In the meantime, to mark a point fundamental for
the public order, my government, in December, 1922,
issued an admonition to the Fascists themselves. It was
in the following terms:
“Every Fascist must be a guardian of order. Every
disturber is an enemy even if he carries in his pocket the
identification card of the Party.”
Thus, in a few words, were the position and the duty
of the Party in the life of the Fascist regime indicated.
We encountered plenty of pitfalls and snares in 1922.
The Party had reached a peculiar sensitiveness, through
its intense experience. In the moment of its hardest test,
it had shown itself to be equipped to guide the interests
of the country as a whole. The revolution had not had
long, bloody consequences, as in other revolutions, ex­
cept for the moment of battle. Violence, as I have said
before, had been controlled by my will.
Nevertheless, the position of some opposing newspa­
pers was strange indeed. Those of the Corriere della
Sera, of Liberal-Democratic coloring, and that of the
Avanti, Socialist, agreed—strange bed-fellows!—in
harshly criticising the simultaneous and violent action
of Fascism, while they were wishing in their hearts and

The Fascist State and the Future 299
writing that the Fascist experiment would soon be fin­
ished. According to these political diagnosticians, it
was a matter of an experiment of short duration, in
which Fascism would be destroyed either on the parlia­
mentary rocks or by an obvious inadequacy to direct
the complexities of Italian life. We saw later the
wretched end of these prophets; but to attain results it
had been necessary for me, particularly in the first year,
continually to watch the Party. It had always to remain
in perfect efficiency, superior to opposing critics and to
snares, ready for orders and commands.
One grave danger was threatening the Party: it was
the too free admission of new elements. Our small hand­
fuls in the warlike beginnings were now growing to ex­
cess, so much so that it was necessary to put a padlock
on the door to prevent the influx of further member­
ship. Once the solidity of Fascism had been proved, all
the old world wanted to rush into its ranks. If this had
happened, we would have come back to the old mental­
ity, the old defects, by overhasty adulteration instead
of keeping our growth selective through education and
devotion. Otherwise the Party, augmented by all the
opportunists of the eleventh hour, would have lost its
vibrating and original soul. A check had to be placed
upon the old world. It could go and wait with its bedslippers on, without spoiling a movement of young peo­
ple for Italian rebirth.
After I had closed, in 1926, the registration in the
Party, I used all my force, care and means for the se­
lection and the education of Youth. The Avanguardia

300

My Autobiography

was then created, together with the Opera Nazionale
Balilla, the organization for boys and girls which, be­
cause of its numerous merits and the high value of its
educational activities, I have chosen even recently to
term “The invaluable pupil of the Fascist Regime.”
This programme brought forth unparalleled results;
as a result of it the Party has never encountered a really
serious crisis. I believe that I can count among my
qualities the ability to act in good season and to strike
at the right moment without false sentimentality where
the shadow of a weakness or of a trap is hidden.
In this watchful work of prevention, I have always
had at my side good secretaries of the Party who have
helped me immeasurably. Michele Bianchi had already
ably led the Party until the March on Rome. He had
been able to balance the particularly violent character
of the movement against the demands of political sit­
uations which had reality and which must be handled
with wisdom. Michele Bianchi has been an excellent po­
litical secretary because of this very reason, and to-day
he is still with the government, as my greatly appre­
ciated collaborator in internal politics. He has a political
mind of the first order, a reflective mind; he is faithful
at every hour. The regime can count on him every time.
The Honorable Sansanelli, a courageous participant
in the late war, and to-day president of the Interna­
tional Federation of World War Veterans, took his
place. The Hon. Sansanelli has been able to face vague
secessionist movements, which revealed an origin un­
doubtedly in the peculiar, pre-Fascist, Italian political
Masonry.

The Fascist State and the Future 301
There was in that period a reprisal by anti-Fascist
forces. The old Liberal world, defeated, but tolerated
by the generosity of the regime, was not exactly aware
of the new order of things. It regained its wonted
haughtiness; Italian Masonry was still developing,
with its infinite and uncontrollable tentacles, its prac­
tices of corruption and of dissolution. These forces of
negation even armed the Communist remnants in the
obscurity of ambushes and cellars. A new “direttorio,”
presided over by the Secretary Hon. Giunta until Sep­
tember, 1924, was formed after the elections. I have
already spoken of the Fascist activity of the Hon.
Giunta. In the second half of that year, the anti-Fas­
cist movement, aroused by obscure national and inter­
national forces, showed itself in growing intensity on all
fronts. I threw it down on its nose with my speech of
January 3, 1925. But also, following that, I determined
that a line of more combatively intransigent nature
should be imposed by our party: and with this duty in
mind, on February 12, 1925, I appointed the Hon. Ro­
berto Farinacci General Secretary of the Party.
Farinacci knew how to show himself worthy of the
task with which I had intrusted him. His accomplish­
ments, considered in their entirety and in the light of
the results attained, were those of a well-deserving Sec­
retary. He broke up the residues of the “aventinismo”
which had remained here and there in the country; he
gave a tone of high and cutting intransigentism, not only
political but also moral, to the whole Party, invoked
against offenders and plotters those exceptional laws
which I had promulgated after four attempted assassi­

302

My Autobiography

nations had demonstrated the criminality of anti-Fascism. I was closely following this movement of vig­
orous reprisal by the Party and had prepared in time
the necessary provisions. The Hon. Farinacci is one of
the founders of Italian Fascism. He has followed me
faithfully since 1914.
After his task had been accomplished, the Hon. Fa­
rinacci left the position of General Secretary to the
Hon. Augusto Turati, a courageous veteran of the
World War, a man of clear mind and aristocratic tem­
perament, who has been able to give the Party the style
of the new times and the consciousness of the new needs.
The Hon. Turati has accomplished a great and indis­
pensable work of educational improvement with the
Fascist masses. Besides these precious elements in the
high positions of the Party of to-day, I must mention
the Hon. Renato Ricci for the organization of the
“Balilla,” Melchiorri for the Militia, Marinelli, a
courageous administrative secretary, Starrace, a valor­
ous veteran, and Arpinati, a faithful Black Shirt since
March, 1919, and a founder of Fascism in Bologna.
The Party has yielded me new prefects for Fascist
Italy, elements for syndicalist organization, and con­
suls, while various deputies have been appointed Min­
isters and Under-Secretaries. Little by little, proceed­
ing by degrees, I have given an ever more integral and
intransigent line to the whole world of government.
Almost all positions of command have to-day been in­
trusted to Fascist elements. Thus after four years of
the regime we have given actuality to the formula: “All

The Fascist State and the Future 303
the Power to all-Fascism” which I enunciated in June,
1925, at a Fascist meeting in Rome.
I have controlled my impatience. I have avoided leaps
into darkness. I do not sleep my way to conclusions, I
have blended the pre-existing needs with the formation
of a future. Naturally, giving to the state a completely
Fascist character and filling all the ganglia of national
life with the vitality and newer force of faithful Black
Shirts, I not only did not detract from, but constantly
added to the importance of the National Fascist Party
as the force of the regime. This transfer from political
organization to the permanent organization of a state
guarantees in the most solid manner the future of the
regime. I have laid, with my own hands, the corner­
stone of representative reform, based on the interests
of Italian unity and the Italian cosmos, and I have ar­
ranged that the Grand Fascist Council became a defi­
nite constitutional organ for the constancy of the state.
Thus the Fascist Party, while remaining independent,
is bound by ties of steel to the very essence of the new
Fascist state.
A subject that is always interesting and is often mis­
understood both by Italians and foreigners is that of
the relations between State and Church in Italy. The
Law of the Guarantees in 1870, by which the question
was believed to be solved, remains a form of relation­
ship which since the rise of Fascism has not caused fric­
tion of any great significance. To be sure, the Holy See
renews, once in a while, protestations for the supposed

304

My Autobiography

rights usurped in Rome by the Italian state, but there
are no substantial reasons for apprehension, nor pro­
found differences.
This serenity of relations is a tribute to the Fascist
regime. In the past a legend had blossomed around dis­
sensions of historical character tending to foment par­
tisan hatreds; an anti-clerical activity had been devel­
oped for a long time in various forms, and it served,
through many sections of the so-called “Free thought”
groups, to augment the nefarious political influence of
our form of Masonry. The idea was diffused that re­
ligion was a “private affair,” and religion was not ad­
mitted in any sort of public act.
If, however, anti-clericalism was superficial and
coarse, on the other hand, the Church, with its lack of
comprehension of the new Italy, with its tenacity in
its intransigent position, had only exasperated its op­
ponents. Anti-Church forces even went so far as to ban
every Catholic symbol and even Christian doctrine from
the schools. These were periods of Socialist-Masonic
audacity. It was necessary that ideas should be clarified.
We had to differentiate and separate the principles of
political clericalism from the vital essence of the Catho­
lic faith. The situation as it had stood caused, in Italy,
dangerous deviations, which ranged from the policy of
“abstention” between 1870 and 1900, to the Popular
party of baleful memory which was destined to degen­
erate little by little until in 1925 it took a form of cleri­
cal bolshevism which I resolutely liquidated and put
into political and intellectual bankruptcy.

The Fascist State and the Future 305
This troubled atmosphere, so infested by misunder­
standings and superficialities, has been relieved by Fas­
cism. I did not deceive myself as to the seriousness of
the crisis which is always opening between State and
Church; I had not fooled myself into thinking that I
would be able to cure a dissension which involves the
highest interests and principles, but I had made a deep
study of those lines of set directions and inflexible tem­
peraments which, if softened, were destined to make the
principles of religious faith, religious observance, and
respect for the forms of worship bloom again, indepen­
dent of political controversies. They are, in fact, the es­
sential factors of the moral and civic development of a
country which is renewing itself.
To be sincere, I must add that high circles of the
Vatican have not always been known to appreciate my
work, possibly for political reasons, and have not helped
me in the steps which appeared wise for all. My labor
had not been easy nor light; our Masonry had spun a
most intricate net of anti-religious activity; it domi­
nated the currents of thought; it exercised its influence
over publishing houses, over teaching, over the admin­
istration of justice and even over certain dominant sec­
tions of the armed forces.
To give an idea of how far things had gone, this sig­
nificant example is sufficient. When, in parliament, I
delivered my first speech of November 16, 1922, after
the Fascist revolution, I concluded by invoking the
assistance of God in my difficult task. Well, this sen­
tence of mine seemed to be out of place! In the Italian

306

My Autobiography

parliament, a field of action for Italian Masonry, the
name of God had been banned for a long time. Not
even the Popular party—the so-called Catholic party
—had ever thought of speaking of God. In Italy, a
political man did not even turn his thoughts to the Di­
vinity. And, even if he had ever thought of doing so,
political opportunism and cowardice would have de­
terred him, particularly in a legislative assembly. It re­
mained for me to make this bold innovation! And in an
intense period of revolution! What is the truth? It is
that a faith openly professed is a sign of strength.
I have seen the religious spirit bloom again; churches
once more are crowded, the ministers of God are them­
selves invested with new respect. Fascism has done and
is doing its duty.
Some ecclesiastical circles have not shown, as I have
said, ability to evaluate and understand in all its im­
portance the political and moral rebirth of new Italy.
One of the first symptoms of such lack of comprehen­
sion was exhibited at the beginning of Fascist rule: at
first the so-called Catholic party wanted to collaborate
by having some members in the government, in the new
regime. This collaboration, however, began to lead us
through a series of reticences and misunderstandings,
and after six months I was forced to show the door to
the ministers belonging to that party.
I have seen the Popular party allied with Masonry.
But when parties have not clashed on the Italian politi­
cal scene, the troubles between State and Church have
been reflected in international politics. The Roman

The Fascist State and the Future 307
Question has been once more under discussion. Both
historical forces have strengthened their concepts. Jour­
nalistic controversies and objective discussions have
demonstrated that the problem is not ripe and may be
insoluble. Perhaps two mentalities and two worlds are
confronting each other in a century-old historic and im­
practicable opposition. One has its roots in the religion
of the fathers and lives by the ethical forces of the Civis
Romanus; the other has the universal character of
equality of brothers in God.
To-day, with the highest loyalty, Fascism under­
stands and values the Church and its strength: such is
the duty of every Catholic citizen. But politics, the de­
fense of national interests, the battles over ourselves
and others, must be the work of the modern Fascist
Italians who want to see the immortal and irreplaceable
Church of Saint Peter respected, and do not wish ever
to confound themselves with any political force which
has no disclosed outline and knows no patriotism. What­
ever the errors of its representatives may be, nobody
thinks of taking away from the Church its universal
character, but everybody is right in complaining about
certain disavowals of some Italian Catholics, and may
justly resent political approval of certain middle-European currents, upon which Italy places even now her
most ample reservations. Faith in Italy has been
strengthened. Fascism gives impulse and vigor to the
religion of the country. But it will never be able for any
reason to renounce the sovereign rights of the state and
of the functions of the state.

CHAPTER XIII

EN ROUTE
OME readers of my autobiographic record may
attribute to these pages of mine the character of
a completed life story. If they have believed that
story completed they are mistaken. It is absurd to be­
lieve that one can conclude a life of battles at the age
of forty-five.
Detailed memoirs of intimate and personal character
are the attributes of old age and the chimney-corner. I
have no intention of writing any “memoirs.” They only
represent the consciousness of a definitely completed
cycle. They do not appear of much importance to a
man who is in the most vigorous ardor of his activities!
I was the leader of the revolution and chief of the
government at thirty-nine. Not only have I not finished
my job, but I often feel that I have not even begun it.
The better part comes toward me. I go toward it at
this moment. But I take pride in affirming that I have
laid solid foundations for the building of Fascism.
Many ask me what my policy in the future will be, and
where my final objective lies.
My answers are here. I ask nothing for myself, nor
for mine; no material goods, no honors, no testimonials,
no resolutions of approval which presume to consecrate
me to History. My objective is simple: I want to make

S

S08

En Route

309

Italy great, respected, and feared; I want to render my
nation worthy of her noble and ancient traditions. 1
want to accelerate her evolution toward the highest
forms of national co-operation; I want to make a
greater prosperity forever possible for the whole people.
I want to create a political organization to express,
to guarantee, and to safeguard our development. I am
tireless in my wish to see newly born and newly reborn
Italians. With all my strength, with all my energies,
without pause, without interruption, I want to bring to
them their fullest opportunities. I do not lose sight of
the experience of other peoples, but I build with ele­
ments of our own and in harmony with our own pos­
sibilities, with our traditions, and with the energy of
the Italian people. I have made a profound study of the
interests, the aspirations and the tendencies of our
masses. I push on toward better forces of life and prog­
ress. I weigh them, I launch them, I guide them. I de­
sire our nation to conquer again, with Fascist vigor,
some decades or perhaps a century of lost history. Our
garrison is the party, which has demonstrated its irre­
placeable strength. I have trust in young people. Their
spiritual and material life is guided by attentive, quick
minds and by ardent hearts. I do not reject advice even
from opponents whenever they are honest. I cover with
my contempt dishonest and lying opponents, slander­
ers, deniers of the country and every one who drowns
every sense of dignity, every sentiment of national and
human solidarity in the filthy cesspool of low grudges.
Defeated ones who cluck to the wind, survivors of a

310

My Autobiography

building which has toppled forever, accomplices in the
ruin and shame into which the country was to have been
dragged, sometimes do not even have the dignity of
silence.
I am strict with my most faithful followers. I always
intervene where excesses and intemperance are revealed.
I am near to the heart of the masses and listen to its
beats. I read its aspiration and interests. I know the
virtue of the race. I probe it in its purity and soundness.
I will fight vice and degeneracy and will put them down.
The so-called “Liberal institutions” created at other
times because of a fallacious appearance of protection
are destroyed and divested of their phrases and false
idealisms by the new force of Fascism with its idealism
planted on realities.
Air and light, strength and energy, shine and vibrate
in the infinite sky of Italy 1 The loftiest civic and na­
tional vision to-day leads this people to its goal, this
people which is living in its great new springtime. It
animates my long labors. I am forty-five and I feel the
vigor of my work and my thought. I have annihilated in
myself all self-interest: I, like the most devoted of citi­
zens, place upon myself and on every beat of my heart,
service to the Italian people. I proclaim myself their
servant. I feel that all Italians understand and love me;
I know that only he is loved who leads without weak­
ness, without deviation, and with disinterestedness and
full faith.
Therefore, going over what I have already done I
know that Fascism, being a creation of the Italian race,

En Route

311

has met and will meet historical necessities, and so, un­
conquerable, is destined to make an indelible impression
on the twentieth century of history.

INDEX
Bergonzoni, 110.
Abruzzi, 174.
Bersaglieri, 14, 15, 47, 42.
Acerbo, Giacomo, 194.
Berta, 132.
Adrianople, siege of, 29.
Bertini, 183.
Adriatic, the, 7, 72; the Upper, 92.
Bertone, 183.
Adriatic problem, the, 251.
Biagi, 118.
Afghanistan, 254.
Bianchi, Michele, 173, 175, 300.
Against the Return of the Beast, quoted, 65,
Benda,
Dr. Ambrogio, 136.
66.
Black Shirts, 207, 210, 212, 213, 226, 236,
Aiello, 92.
269,
271,
302, 303; the power of, 200,
Ala, 17.
202.
Albania, 109, 111, 257; Italian military
Blue Shirt, 210.
mission in, 250.
Albertini, Senator, 103, 222.
Bologna, 93, 139, 177, 226, 295; Fascism
in, 81,117,307; Mussolini family promi­
Alessandri, 177
nent in, 2, 4; Palace d’ Accursio in, 116;
Alessio, 183.
City Hall Palace of, 117; the “PoAlighieri, 132.
Alliance of Labor, the, 163.
desta” of, 239.
Allies, the, 248; Italians among the, 62. Bolshevik ideas, 73.
Bolshevism, 93,112; Russian, 82; Utopian
Alps, the, 44, 46, 47, 72.
spirit of, 69.
Amendola, 183.
Amiata, 226.
Bolzano, 170.
Amilcare, 3.
Bonacini, Artillery Lieutenant Mario,
Ancona, 169, 170, 174; Socialist congress 251.
of, 157.
Bonardi, Carlo, 195.
Anglo-Saxons, the, 25.
Bonomi ministry, the, 142, 145, 158, 159,
Anile, 183.
165.
Apennines, the, 1.
Bainsizza, 50.
Arditi Association, the, 52,570.
Bosdarl,
Ambassador, 255.
Argelato, 2.
Bosnla-llerzegovlna, annexation of, 30.
Armistice, the, 60, 63.
Bronnor,
36, 153.
Army of Iron, the, 50.
Brenner Pass, Lho, 141, 153, 255.
Arno River, the, 132.
Brescia,
43.
Arpinati, Leandro, 93, 117, 169, 239, 302.Brland, 149.
Asiago, the Alps of, 50.
British Empire, Foreign Minister of the,
Augusteo, the congress at, 144.
254.
Augustus, the tomb of, 144.
British Olubaland, 259.
Austria, 32, 131.
Bruno, Giordano, quoted, 65, 66.
Austria-Hungary, 30, 34, 36, 54.
Austria, 17; Mussolini expellod from, 18. Budapest, 53.
Bulgaria, 131.
Austrian navy, the, 62.
Bulgarian foreign ministers, 255.
Austrian spies, 60.
Bundles or Fight 90. 121. 130, 144, 171;
Avanguardia, the, 299, 300.
Central Committee of, 125.
Avanti, 18, 20, 32, 35, 37, 38, 77, 83, 103,
115, 134, 167, 298.
Oablnofc,
the, 168.
Aventino, the, 222, 232, 233; secession of
Cagoia. 101, 102.
the, 230.
Caillva,
118
.
Aviation, decline of, 77,112,113; success
Oamlnnte, parish of, 1.
of Italian, 291.
Candlano canal, the, 8.
Cannes, Inter-Allied Conference at, 148,
Balbo, Italo, 173, 174, 176.
149.
Balducci, 3.
Capollo, General. 237, 238.
Balkan Wars, 28.
Caporetto, 50. 52. 77, 102, 218.
“Balilla,” the, 289, 300, 302.
Banca Italiana di Sconto, crash of the, Carabinieri, 65. 232.
Oaradonna, 174.
145, 147, 155.
Carducol, Glosue, II.
Bank of Italy, the, 269, 271.
Oarduccl. Valfredo, 11,
Bank of Naples, the, 271.
Garirna, Abbe, 102.
Bank of Sicuy, the, 271.
Oarnaro, 124.
Bari, 109.
Carnazza, Gabrlello, 194.
Baseggio, Major, 143.
Carso, 27, 44, 47. 48.
Bastianelli, Professor, 237.
Carte, Surgeon-Major Lulgl, 251.
Battisti, Cesare, 17, 36.
Carthage, 4 I.
Belgium, 41; invasion of, 34.
Gasat.1, Minister, 233, 284.
Belgrade, 32.
GathoUc Church, the, 154.
Belluno, 50.
813

314

Index

Catholic Party, the; 306.
de9*»Q
Vecehi, Cesare Maria; 133, 174, 195,
Oavazzoni, Stefano, 194.
Central Post Office, 86.
De Vito, 183.
Chamber of Parliament, the, 247.
Diana Theatre, the, 133, 134, 138.
Chamber of Deputies, the, 149.
Diaz, General Armando, 105, 107, 194,
Chamberlain, 254.
290, 291, 292.
Charles of Hapsburg, death of, 162.
di Cesaro, Giovanni Colonna, 194.
•‘Cheka,” 227, 228.
Di Giorgio, General, 292.
Child, Richard Washburn,"249.
Dodecannes, question of the, 249.
Church of Saint Peter, 307.
Doubet, General, 181.
Church, the, 73, 90, 306, 307.
Dovia, 1.
Ciano, Costanzo, 195.
Duce, the, 124, 175.
Cipriani, 3.
Duncan, Isadora, 46.
Circolo Sdesa, the, 172.
Cirenaica, 259, 260.
England, 34, 285; Italy’s war debt agree­
Cittadlni, General, 184,185.
ment with, 265.
Cividale, 44.
English ambassador, the, 239.
Civis Romanus, the, 307.
Eritrea, 259.
Classical Lyceum, 287.
Estensi, castle of the, 119.
Clemenceau, 33.
Eternal City, the, 189.
Collectivity, the, 280.
Combattenti, the, 76, 77.
Pacta, 163, 164, 168, 182, 183, 192.
Commission of Inquiry, the, 77.
Facta ministry, the, 160, 161.
Commission of the Solons, 235.
Paenza, 7, 93.
Communes, the, 235.
Parlnaccl, Hon. Roberto, 301, 302.
Communists, the, 132, 133, 134, 215;
Famett, 251.
In Rome, 162.
Pascl dl Oombattimento, the, 67, 72, 90,
Complementary Schools, 286.
91; Central Committee of the, 171.
Conclave, the, 155.
Fascism, 24, 68, 103, 141, 142, 184, 185,
Conference of the Ambassadors, 252.
189, 197, 228, 203, 207, 211, 219, 220,
Congress of Reggio Emilia in 1912, 18.
222, 233, 234, 241, 256, 258. 268, 278,
Consorzio Valori, the, 269.
279, 298; a symbol of, 7; effect of, on
Constitution of 1848, the, 234.
religion, 307; future of, 308-311; re­
Conti. 179.
organization of ranks of, 90.
Copptno, Minister, 284.
Fascist government, 277.
Corfu, 229, 252, 253.
Fascist National party, the, 144.
Corgini, Ottavio, 195.
Fascist revolution, the, 63.
Corriere della Sera, the, 72, 102, 167, 213, Fascisti, the, 73, 77, 165, 183-193, 236;
287, 298.
creation of the, 37; reassembling ranks
Corridoni, Filippo, 37.
of, 86; devotion of, 297.
Coselschi, Eugenio, 181.
Fascists, 117, 232; Lombardians, 132.
Costa, Andrea, 3.
Favara di Venezia, 232.
Council of Ministers, 291.
Federzoni, Deputy Luigi, 142, 194, 235.
Credaro, Minister, 152, 153, 284.
Ferdinand, Archduke Francis, murder of,
Credaro policy, 141.
30, 31.
Cremona, 110, 177, 171, 232.
Ferrara, 44, 119, 139, Palace Estense in,
Crespano, 232.
116.
Crespi, 179.
Festival of Labor, 162.
Crown, the, 191, 224.
Finance,
Minister of, 261, 264.
Curzon, Lord, 248, 249.
Finzi, Aldo, 194, 219.
Czarism, fall of, 154.
Flume,
36,
62, 72, 89, 90, 96, 100-103,
Czechoslovakia, Commercial treaties con­ 112, 129, 56,
141, 151, 180, 249, 253; con­
cluded with, 250.
tested, 76; French sailors and Italian
soldiers clash at, 74; Fascists in, 79 fl.;
Dalmatia, 36, 56, 62, 72, 76, 96, 103,106,
occupation of, 78, 79; Bloody Christ­
112, 130, 141, 249; loss of, 253.
mas m, 116; Italian resistance in, 122.
D’Annunzio, Gabriele, 41, 77 ft., 86, 96, Florence, 91 ff., 212, 232, 266, 295.
101, 113, 122 ff„ 151, 180, 181, 196.
Florio, Lieutenant Federico, 151.
Daneo, Minister, 284.
Forces of Order, the, 81.
Dante, 8, 36, 56, 204.
Foreign Affairs, Ministry of, 34, 109, 142.
Dardanelles, the, 46.
Forli, 1, 7, 18. 113, 232.
De Bono, General, 173, 174, 176.
Form, 228.
De Capitani, Giuseppe, 179, 194.
Foro Bonaparte, 137.
Delcroix, Carlo, 217, 228.
Foscari, Count Nicolo’, 127
dell’ Annunziata, Collare, 225.
France, 34, 41, 46; German invasion of,
Democracy, 275, 276, 280, 284.
34; commercial treaties concluded with,
Democrat-Masons, 222.
250.1
Democratic groups, 166.
Frassati, Senator, 102.
Democrats, the, 85, 213.
Freemasons, 126.
De Nicola, 158, 159, 215.
French Army, the, 34.
De Pinedo, 291.
Fulci, 183.
Deputies, Chamber of, 149.
Fuleieri, Paolucci de Oalboli, 2.
de Revel, Admiral Paolo Thaon, 107,
194, 290.
Gai, Silvio, 195.
De Stefani, Alberto; 194, 261, 265.
Gaini, 140,

Index

315

Jesuits, anti-Masonlc spirit of the. 157.
Galileo, the; 97.
Jaurhs, murder of, 32.
Gaivani, Gastone; 93.
Garian, 259.
Judrlo, 36.
Jugo-Slavia, 101, 102. 105, 253. 254.
Garibaldi, Bruno. 40, 70. 124. ’
Garibaldi, Gostante, 40.
Jugoslavia, the Rapallo treaty with, 248.
Garibaldi, Ricciotti, 40; in Sicily. 41.
Julian the Apostate, 97.
Gasei, the Sicilian, 59.
Kaiser, the, 32, 41.
Gazetla del Popolo, the, 79.
General Fascist Command, the, 188.
King Victor Emmanuel III, 41, 183, 184,
Genoa. 41, 295; conference at, ,148, 149, 188, 196.
162.
KOnlgsborg, Invasion of, 51.
Kremlin, the Mongol Galileo of, 07.
Gentile, Giovanni, 194.
Gentile Reform, the, 282, 285, 288.
Labor
Charter, tho, 270, 280.
Genzano, 232.
Labor Oonfodoratlon, the, 160.
German spies, 60.
Labor
Day In Romo, 270.
Germans, 254, 255.
La Fontaino, quoted, 100.
Germany, 32, 131; as ally of AustriaLatinity, 25.
Hungary, 34.
Lausanne, 248, 240; tho conference of. 14.
Giampietro, General, 181.
League of Nations, the, 72. 101, 257.
Giarabub, 259.
Giolitti, Giovanni, 21,37,41,90,108, 111, Lebon, Gustave, 25.
Left, the, 89.
129, 138, 141, 160, 165.
Legion of RonchI, the, 124.
Giolittinians, liberal, 60.
opening of the TwentyGiordani, Lieutenant, 118; death of, 119. Legislature,
seventh, 216.
Giulian Alps, the, 36.
Legislature,
the
Twenty-seventh. 220.
Giuliani, 140.
96, 112; propaganda of, 275.
Giunta, Secretary, Hon., 129, 137, 138, Lenin,
Libera
Docenza,
the Institute of. 288.
230, 301.
liberal Democratic pacifist group, the,
Giuriati, Giovanni, 173, 194.
37.
Gordian knot, the, 18.
Liberal Party, the, 121, 200, 260.
Gorizia, 50.
Liberalism, 275, 280, 284.
Grand Fascist Council, 279, 281; organi­ Liberals,
the, 85, 126, 213, 223.
zation of the, 208, 209.
Liblan colony, the, 259.
Grandi, 265.
Libya, 40.
Grappa, Mount, 50, 52.
Libyan war, the, 28.
Graziadei, 141.
Lissia, Pietro. 195.
Greece, 46, 252.
Littorio, the, 270.
Greek foreign ministers, 255.
Locarno treaty, the, 257.
Gualtieri, 12.
Lombardian, Fascists, 132.
Guardia Medica, of Porta Venezia, 136. Lombardian Journalists, convention of
Guardia Regia, 125.
the, 94.
Lombardy, 36, 43; the Fascists of. 134.
London, 263; a Mussolini In, 3.
Hall of Parliament, the, 89.
London pact, the, 105, 253.
High Adige, question of the, 255.
Lucchosf, Caflero, 161.
Hortis, Senator Attilio, 107.
Lucetti, 238.
Hotel Dragoni, 237.
Luclanl. 183.
Hungary, 131, 257.
Lule-Burgas, 29.
Hymn of Workers, the, 89.
Lupl, Dario, 195.
Illyrian Alps, the, 36.
Maddalena, 291.
Independents, the, 89.
Mafia, the, 236.
Inter-Allied Conference, 148.
Manaresi,
119.
Interior, Minister of the, 235; Secretary Manouba, 41.
of the, 219.
Mantua,
113.
International Congress of Medicine, in­ Marche, 174.
auguration of the, 238.
Marchese of San Guillano, the, 33, 34.
Internationale, the, 89.
Marchi, Giovanni, 195.
Interventisti, 73.
Marchiafava, Professor, 237.
Isonzo, 50; the Battle of, 46.
Marco Polo, 7.
Italian Academy, creation of an, 290.
Marinelli, 302.
Italian Army, the, 47.
Marinetti, F. T., 91.
Italian Fighting Fascisti, 68, 70.
Marini, 6.
Italian Fascisti of Combat, the, 71.
Mario, Pascal, 232.
Italian Liberal Party, the, 72, 96.
Marsala, 117.
Italian Nationalism, united with Fas­
Martire, Egilberto, 106.
cism, 210.
Marx, Karl, 40.
Italian Masonry, 214, 300, 305, 306.
Masi, 136.
Italian school system, 201.
Masonry, 156; Italian political, 143, 200,
Italian-Swiss treaty, 250.
210, 214; Fascism against, 235; Popu­
Italy, 240, 248, 255; Premier of, 14, pub­ lar party allied with, 306.
lic opinion in, 34; difficult internationalMasurian Lakes, Battle of the, 51,
situation in, 96; voting in, 205: foreign Matteotti, 218, 219, 221, 222, 226.
of, 257; southern, 259; disciplineMaturity Examinations, 287.
Eolicy
i, 276, 284; clergy in, 293.
Mazzini, 82.

316

Index

Orpheum Coffee Shop, the, 93.
Meda, 116, 165.
Ostia, 295.
Mediterranean, the, 40, 257.
Oviglio, Aldo, 118, 119, 194, 233.
Melcbiorri, 302.
Mendola, 6.
Merlin, Umberto, 195.
Padua, 41, 212.
Milan, 18, 20, 39, 41, 49, 59, 60, 63, 77, Palace d' Accursio, 116, 139.
81, 86, 100, 104, 113, 115, 132, 165, Palace Estense, 116.
168, 171, 179, 187, 212, 215, 295; Pro­ Palazzo Ohigi, 215, 236, 237, 239.
cession of the Defeat of, 65; population Palermo, 295.
of, 110; the Fascisti of, 166; the Circolo Pallieri, Dr. Leonardo, 136.
Sciesa of, 172.
Panc&ni, Guido, 93.
Milan Association of Merchants and Paolo da Cannobio, 39.
Shopkeepers, 68.
Paratore, 183.
Pareto, 14.
Milani, Fulvio, 195, 209.
Paris, 96, 99.
Militia, the, 230, 302.
Minister of the Interior, 241.
Parma, 232.
Partito Popolare, creation of the, 73.
Minister of the Navy, 290.
Pascoli, Giovanni, 3.
Minister of War, the, 290.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the, 34.
Pasella, 91.
Ministry of International Affairs, the,
Pasic, 254.
Peano, 163, 200, 260.
240.
Perugia, 175, 176, 185, 295.
Ministry of Public Works, the, 110.
Pesaro, 267; speech of, 270.
Ministry of War, the, 194.
Piacenza, 110, 212.
Misuri, 228.
Piavo, the, 50, 52, 53.
Modena, 143.
Piazza Beligloioso, tho, 81.
Modigliani, the Minister of, 102.
Piazza del Duomo, 39.
Moduno di Livenza, 232.
Piazza 8. Sepolero, in Milan, 68.
Monastie of Treviso, 53.
Piccagnont, Doctor, 48.
Monfalcone, 102, 115.
Monferrato, Casale, the massacre of, 133.Piedmont, 283.
Piedmont newspaper, 90.
Mongol Galileo, the, 97.
Piombino, 136, 138.
Montecitorio, 140, 163, 169, 199, 202,
Piperno, 264.
216, 222.
Piraeus, the, 46.
Monzambo, 232.
Pisacane, Carlo, 82.
Morgagni, 140.
Pistoia, 151.
Morgan loan, the, 269.
Pittoni, the socialist, at Triest; 60.
Moscow, 96, 129.
Pius X, 153.
Mount Stelvio, 57.
Place Borromeo, the, 139.
Mussolini, Alessandro, 3, 9.
Plato, 204.
Mussolini, Arnaldo, 5, 8, 20, 148, 186;
Po Valley, 21, 128, 139, 171, 175; rep­
death of, 18.
resentatives of the, 119; agitations in
Mussolini, Benito, 87, 194, 237, 247;
the, 274.
birthplace of, 1; childhood of, 4 ff.;
“Podesta,”
the, 235, 239.
as Premier of Italy,
14;
as
a
private
PoincarS, 248.
Bersagliere, 43.1
Poland,
commercial
treaties concluded
Mussolini, Edda, 21, 136.
with, 250.
Mussolini, Edvige, 20.
Police
chief
of
Rome,
219.
Mussolini, Giovanni, 2.
Polish foreign ministers, 255.
Mussolini, Rachele, 20.
Political
Economy,
the
Honorable De
Mussolini, Rosa, 5; death of, 17.
Stefani as a Doctor of, 262, 263.
Mussolini family, the, 2, 4.
Pontiff Benedict XV, Giacomo della
Chiesa, 153, 154, 155.
Naples, 41, 169, 171, 295; historic con­
Pontificate, the, 191.
gress at, 175.
Pope, the, 31, 33.
Naples, the Fascisti of, 82.
“Popolari,” 193.
National Fascist Party, the, 296.
Popolo d’ Italia, the, 5, 17, 39, 40, 45, 47,
National Guard, 3.
65, 68, 72, 77, 85, 93, 94, 100, 106, 112,
National Militia, the, 234.
113, 135, 136, 137, 148, 170, 175, 176,
National Organization of Balilla, 289.
178, 179, 185, 186.
National party, the, 183.
Nationalism, 211.
Popular Party, the, 95, 138, 211, 306.
Nationalists, the, 81, 82.
Populari, the, 64.
Naviglio River, the, 110.
"Populars,” the, 213, 215, 222.
Navy, success of Italian, 291.
Porta Pia, 238.
Nettuno Conventions, the, 253, 254.
Porta Venezia, Guardia Medica of, 136.
Nevosso, 153.
Predappio, 1, 2, 6, 12.
Nincic 254
Predappio Nuovo, 6.
Nitti, 63, 74, 75, 76, 80, 89, 90, 99, 101; Prefect, the, of Rome, 219.
103, 105, 202, 209; Cabinet of, 29.
Prefetura, the, 84.
Premilcuore, 20.
Northern Italy, 141.
Press Office, Chief of the, 219.
Noske, 102.
Prince von Btilow, 35.
Priori, a, 82.
Opeglia, 17.
Prussia, the King of, 35.
Opera Nazionale Balilla, the, 300.
"Psychology of the Crowd,” 25.
Orlando, 73, 158, 159, 165, 168, 214.

Index

317

Public Instruction, the Minister of, 282, Scientific Lyceum, 286.
285.
Senedrlum, the Socialist, 37.
Public Works, the Ministry of, 110.
Seraievo, murder of, 21, 30.
Pugiie, 169.
Serbia, 30. 32. 34.
Semaglla, 55.
uadrumvirate of Action, 177.
Sesana, 62.
uamero, Italian infants of, 101.
SSvros, treaty of with Turkey, 111.
uartarella, 222.
Sforza, Count, 109, ill, 116, 123, 129,
Quartarellismo,” 222.
142, 247; as Italian ambassador to
uarto dei Mille, 41.
Franco, 246,
uirinal, the, 184, 188.
Shaw, Hornard, 242.
Ship of State, the, 261.
Rabbi River, the, 6.
Sicilian Gasel, the, 59.
Radaelli, Giuseppe, 135.
Slcilianl, Luigi. 106, 195.
Railway Syndicate, the, 110.
Sicily, 212; Garibaldi in. 41; the Mafia
Rapallo, 116; treaty of, 112,122,129,248, in. 236.
249, 253.
Siena, tho province of, 226.
Ravaldino, 1.
Social Democrats, 193.
Ravenna, plain of, 7.
Socialist parliamentary groups, the, 166.
Reason of State, 124.
Socialist Party, the, In Italy, 35.
Reason of the Ideal, 124.
Socialists, the, Htt, 89, 90, 05, 96, 99, 110,
“Red Flag," the, 232.
111, 117, 121. 132, 131, 215, 217, 222,
Red Week, the, 21.
225, 274; victory of, H5; CzoclioslavakReggio Emilia, 12, 18.
lan, 237.
Renaissance, the, 2, 25.
Soleri, 183.
Republicans, the, 89. 118.
Scions; Commission of the, 235.
Republicanism, 225.
Somaliland. 259.
Ricci, Hon. Renato, 302.
Sonnino, 74.
Riccio, 183.
Souzini, Mario, 115.
Ridolfl, Lieutenant, 113.
Southern Russia, republics t f, HO.
Risorgimento, 25.
Sovereign, tho, 183.
Rocco, Alfredo, 140, 195.
Soviet Russia, commercial relations with,
Romagna, 18, 93, 174, 212.'
250.
Roman Littorio, the, 134.
Spa, 111.
Rome, 31, 41, 62, 73, 77, 96, 105, 131, Spain, 257; commercial .treaties concluded
183, 184, 189, 215, 222, 229, 247; the
with, 250.
Fascisti of, 81, 143; the Communists Slampa, the, 00.
in, 162; the march on, 166, 260, 278, Htnrraco, 302.
282, 290, 300; Anti-Fascism in, 202, Switzerland, Mussolini In, 12, 13, 249.
the Governorship of, 236; Ambassador
of the United States in. 249; Labor Taddei, 1H3.
Day in, 279.
Tagllamentl, 102.
Ronchi, 48, 78, 79; the Legion of, 124.
Tnngorra, Vincenzo. 104,
Rossetti Theatre, the, 129.
Teachers Institute, 2H7.
Rossi, Cesare, 183, 219, 224, 225.
Technical Institute, 2H6.
Rossi, Teofllo, 194.
Tclilnl, General Enrico, 251,
Rovigo, the province of, 218.
Tirana, the proeotol of. 111.
Royal Carabinieri, the, 209.
Torznghl, Michele, 195.
Royal Guards, the. 106, 143, 178, 179, Third Army, tho, 50.
209, 229.
Torino, 201).
Ruhr, the, 250.
Toti, Enrico, 102.
Rumania, 46.
Troaty of Versailles. 57, 75, 76.
Rumanian foreign ministers, 249, 255. Trentlno, 30.
Russia, 34, 227, 257; bankruptcy in, 56. Trento. 17, 55. 56. 102. 170.
Russian agitators, 60.
Trlest, 50, 62. 102, 129, 137, 163; tho
Russian revolution, the, 154.
socialist Pittonl at, 60.
Triest, Gulf of, 31.
Salandra, 41, 184.
Triple Alliance Treaty, the, 33.
Salata, 152, 153; policy of, 141.
Tripoli, 259.
Salesiani priests, the, 7.
Tripolitania, 21, 259.
Salvemini, Albertine, 63, 103.
Trumbic, 80.
San Apollinare, the basilica of, 8.
Turati, Hon. Augusto, 302.
San Giorgio di Pesaro, 232.
Turati, Filippo, 84, 100, 168.
San Giuliano, the Marchese of, 33, 34. Turatians, the, 100.
Sansanelli, the Honorable, 300.
Turin, 77, 295; the Fascisti of, 81; "Pop­
Sant' Elia, 137.
ular Party ” assembled in, 211.
Santa Marinella, 186, 187.
Turkey, 111, 131, 257.
Sardi, Alessandro, 195.
Turkish foreign ministers, 255.
Sardinia, 212, 236.
Turks, the, 41, 46.
Sarrocchi, 233.
Tuscan Fascism, the, 226.
Sarzana, massacre of, 142.
Twenty-seventh Legislature, opening of
Savoy Hotel. Rome, 188.
the, 216, 220.
Sbarba, Dello, 183.
Tyrrhenian Sea, the, 174.
Schanzer, 183.
School system, the Italian, 201.
Udine, 51, 55. 92.
Sdaloia, Senator, 112.
Umbria, 175.

318

Index

United States, the, 26; Italy’s war debt Volpi, Count, 265.
agreement with the, 265.
Via Nomentana, 238.
Unknown Soldier, altar of the, 237.
Vicenza, 212.
Upper Adige, Credaro policy in the, 141; Victor Emmanuel III, His Majesty, 41,
Salata policy in the, 141.
183, 184, 188, 196.
Utopian illusions, 192.
Voluntary Militia, 207, 291, 292.
Valona, 102, 109, 111.
War Bulletin, the, 55.
Varano di Costa, 1.
Washington, 263.
Vassallo, Ernesto, 195.
Wilson,
Woodrow, 62, 74, 101, 103.
Vatican, the, 305.
Women’s Lyceum, 287.
Venetian provinces, the, 30.
Workers’
Chambers, 135.
Venetian refugees, 218.
World War, 102; beginning of the, 22, 29;
Veneto, Vittorio, 107, 194, 290.
end
of,
56;
Italy’s fall in the, 57.
Venice, 62, 113, 153, 212.
Vernezzo, 44.
Verona, 14, 15, 112, 232.
Zababria, 130.
Versailles, 74, 80; Treaty of, 57, 75, 76. Zanibour, 237, 238.
Via Paolo da Conuobio, the street of,'65. Zara, 76, 101, 102.
Victory of 1918, leaders of, 290.
Zenzon, 53.
Vienna, 32, 54, 60; Imperial and Royal Zurich, commercial treaties concluded
Government of, 18; the children of, 100. in, 250.


