MARGARET
THATCHER
THE
DOWNING STREET
YEARS

MARGARET, THE LADY THATCHER. O.M., P.C., F.R.S.
HOUSE OF LORDS
LONDON SW1A 0PW

Contents
Introduction
CHAPTER I

Over the Shop

CHAPTER II

Changing Signals

CHAPTER III

Into the Whirlwind

CHAPTER IV

Not At All Right, Jack

CHAPTER V

Not for Turning

CHAPTER VI

The West and the Rest

CHAPTER VII

The Falklands War: Follow the Fleet

CHAPTER VIII

The Falklands: Victory

CHAPTER IX

Generals, Commissars and Mandarins

CHAPTER X

Disarming the Left

CHAPTER XI

Home and Dry

CHAPTER XII

Back to Normalcy

CHAPTER XIII

Mr Scargill’s Insurrection

CHAPTER XIV

Shadows of Gunmen

CHAPTER XV

Keeps Raining all the Time

CHAPTER XVI

Men to Do Business With

CHAPTER XVII

Putting the World to Rights

CHAPTER XVIII Jeux Sans Frontières
CHAPTER XIX

Hat Trick

CHAPTER XX

An Improving Disposition

CHAPTER XXI

Not So Much a Programme, More a Way of

CHAPTER XXII

A Little Local Difficulty

Life

CHAPTER XXIII To Cut and to Please
CHAPTER XXIV Floaters and Fixers
CHAPTER XXV

The Babel Express

CHAPTER XXVI The World Turned Right Side Up
CHAPTER XXVII No Time to Go Wobbly
CHAPTER XXVIII Men in Lifeboats
Chronology
The Cabinet and Other Offices
List of Abbreviations
Index
Acknowledgements
Copyright
About the Publisher

Introduction

‘Ayes, 311. Noes, 310.’ Even before the figures were announced by the tellers,
we on the Opposition benches knew that Jim Callaghan’s Labour Government
had lost its motion of confidence and would have to call a general election.
When the four tellers return to read the total of votes recorded in the lobbies,
MPs can see which party has won from the positions they take up facing the
Speaker. On this occasion the two Tories walked towards the Speaker’s left
hand in the space usually occupied by government whips. A great burst of
cheering and laughter rose from the Tory benches, and our supporters in the
spectators’ galleries roared with out-of-order jubilation. Denis, who was
watching the result from the Opposition box on the floor of the House,
shouted ‘hooray’ and was, quite properly, reproved by one of the Serjeants at
arms. Through the din, however, the stentorian guards’ officer tones of
Spenser Le Marchant, the 6′ 6″ Tory MP for High Peak who was famous for
his intake of champagne, could be heard booming out the result — the first
such defeat for a British Government in more than fifty years.

We had known the figures would be close, but we had not known how close
as we filed in and out of the lobbies. I looked for the unexpected faces who
might decide the outcome. Labour whips had been assiduously rounding up
the handful of independent MPs whose votes might put them over the top. In
the end everything turned on the decision of one elusive Irish MP, Frank
Maguire, who did indeed arrive at the Palace of Westminster, lifting the hopes
of Labour ministers. The wait before the announcement was filled with
rumour and counter-rumour across the Chamber. It seemed endless. Our Chief
Whip quietly gave me his own forecast. I said nothing and tried to look
inscrutable, doubtless without success. Some on the Labour benches, hearing
of Mr Maguire’s appearance, began to grin in anticipation of victory. But Mr
Maguire had arrived only to abstain. And on 28 March 1979, James
Callaghan’s Labour Government, the last Labour Government and perhaps the
last ever, fell from office.

The obsequies across the despatch box were brief and almost formal. Mr
Callaghan told the House that he would take his case to the country and that
Parliament would be dissolved once essential business had been transacted.
Replying for the Opposition, I said that we would co-operate in this to ensure
a dissolution of Parliament at the earliest opportunity. A slight sense of anticlimax after all the excitement took hold of MPs. On all sides we felt that the
Commons was for the moment no longer the centre of events. The great
questions of power and principle would be decided elsewhere. I got up to
leave the Chamber for a meeting of the Shadow Cabinet in my Commons
room, and Willie Whitelaw, who could often sense my mood even before I
realized it myself, put an encouraging arm around my shoulder.
The Shadow Cabinet meeting was brisk and businesslike. Our main concern
was to prevent the Labour Government from scoring any parliamentary runs
in the limited time left to it. In particular, we were strongly of the view that
there should be no budget statement, whatever limited tax changes might be
needed to keep public finance on an even keel. We resolved that in office we
would honour the Labour Government’s pledge to increase pensions by the
amounts which the Prime Minister had announced in the confidence debate.

And we decided to press for an election on 26 April, the earliest possible date,
knowing that Labour would wish to stretch out the timetable in the hope of
restoring their party morale. (In the end we had to settle for 3 May.) Then,
the business concluded, we had a celebratory drink and broke up.

Driving back to my home in Flood Street, Chelsea, with Denis, I reflected on
the coming battle. We had a fight on our hands, of course; but barring
accidents it was a fight we should be able to win. The Government’s defeat in
the confidence debate symbolized a larger defeat for the Left. It had lost the
public’s confidence as well as Parliament’s. The ‘winter of discontent’, the
ideological divisions in the Government, its inability to control its allies in the
trade union movement, an impalpable sense that socialists everywhere had
run out of steam and ideas — all these gave a fin de siècle atmosphere to the
approaching election campaign.
The Tory Party, by contrast, had used its period in Opposition to elaborate
a new approach to reviving the British economy and nation. Not only had we
worked out a full programme for government; we had also taken
apprenticeships in advertising and learnt how to put a complex and
sophisticated case in direct, clear and simple language. We had, finally, been
arguing that case for the best part of four years, so our agenda would, with
luck, strike people as familiar common sense rather than as a wild radical
project. On all these scores I felt a reasonable confidence.
The prospects after an election victory were another matter. Britain in 1979
was a nation that had had the stuffing knocked out of it with progressively
more severe belabourings over the previous hundred years. Beginning in the
1880s, our industrial supremacy had been steadily eroding in the face of first
American, then German competition. To be sure, some part of this erosion
was inevitable and even welcome. As the pioneer of the industrial revolution,
Britain enjoyed a head start over its competitors that was bound to diminish
as nations with larger populations and more abundant natural resources
entered the race. But since their rise would mean the growth of large export
markets for Britain as well as fierce competition in domestic and third
markets — Imperial Germany, for instance, was Britain’s second largest export
market in 1914 — this commercial rivalry was more blessing than curse.
What made it in the event more curse than blessing was Britain’s failure to
respond to the challenge effectively. We invested less; we educated and
trained our people to a lower standard; and we allowed our workers and
manufacturers to combine in various cartels that restricted competition and
reduced efficiency. Thoughtful observers had noticed these trends by the
beginning of this century. Arthur Balfour’s Tory administration of 1902–5
reformed education, training and scientific research in response to a nonpartisan public agitation that has come to be called the ‘quest for national
efficiency’. But such attempts to revive Britain’s economy by social reform
were battling against very profound social forces: the natural complacency of
a nation grown used for more than a hundred years to ‘top dog’ status; the
economic ‘cushion’ provided by Britain’s vast overseas investments (equal in
1914 to 186 per cent of GNP); the deceptive might of an empire which
continued to expand until 1919 but which cost more to defend than it
contributed to national wealth; and, of course, the exhausting national losses
of the First and Second World Wars. As a result, the Britain that woke up on
the morning after 1945 was not only a nation drained by two great military
efforts in defence of common civilization, but also one suffering from a
prolonged bout of economic and financial anaemia.
With the election of Attlee’s Labour Government, however, there began a
sustained attempt, which lasted over thirty years, to halt this relative decline
and kick-start a resurgence along lines which — whether we call them
socialist, social democrat, statist or merely Butskellite* — represented a
centralizing, managerial, bureaucratic, interventionist style of government.
Already large and unwieldy after its expansion in two world wars, the British

Government very soon jammed a finger in every pie. It levied high rates of tax
on work, enterprise, consumption, and wealth transfer. It planned
development at every level — urban, rural, industrial and scientific. It
managed the economy, macro-economically by Keynesian methods of fiscal
manipulation, micro-economically by granting regional and industrial
subsidies on a variety of criteria. It nationalized industries, either directly by
taking ownership, or indirectly by using its powers of regulation to constrain
the decisions of private management in the direction the Government wanted.
(As Arthur Shenfield put it, the difference between the public and private
sectors was that the private sector was controlled by government, and the
public sector wasn’t controlled by anyone.) It made available various forms of
welfare for a wide range of contingencies — poverty, unemployment, large
families, old age, misfortune, ill-health, family quarrels — generally on a
universal basis. And when some people preferred to rely on their own
resources or on the assistance of family and friends, the Government would
run advertising campaigns to persuade people of the virtues of dependence.

The rationale for such a comprehensive set of interventions was, to quote
the former Labour Cabinet minister, Douglas Jay, that ‘the gentleman in
Whitehall really does know better what is good for the people than the people
know themselves.’ A disinterested civil service, with access to the best and
latest information, was better able to foresee economic eventualities and to
propose responses to them than were the blind forces of the so-called ‘free
market’.
Such a philosophy was explicitly advocated by the Labour Party. It gloried
in planning, regulation, controls and subsidies. It had a vision of the future:
Britain as a democratic socialist society, third way between east European
collectivism and American capitalism. And there was a rough consistency
between its principles and its policies — both tending towards the expansion
of government — even if the pace of that change was not fast enough for its
own Left.
The Tory Party was more ambivalent. At the level of principle, rhetorically
and in Opposition, it opposed these doctrines and preached the gospel of free
enterprise with very little qualification. Almost every post-war Tory victory
had been won on slogans such as ‘Britain Strong and Free’ or ‘Set the People
Free’. But in the fine print of policy, and especially in government, the Tory
Party merely pitched camp in the long march to the left. It never tried
seriously to reverse it. Privatization? The Carlisle State Pubs were sold off.
Taxation? Regulation? Subsidies? If these were cut down at the start of a Tory
government, they gradually crept up again as its life ebbed away. The welfare
state? We boasted of spending more money than Labour, not of restoring
people to independence and self-reliance. The result of this style of
accommodationist politics, as my colleague Keith Joseph complained, was
that post-war politics became a ‘socialist ratchet’ — Labour moved Britain
towards more statism; the Tories stood pat; and the next Labour Government
moved the country a little further left. The Tories loosened the corset of
socialism; they never removed it.
Indeed, Keith’s formulation may have been too kind. After a reforming
start, Ted Heath’s Government, in which we both served, proposed and almost
implemented the most radical form of socialism ever contemplated by an
elected British Government. It offered state control of prices and dividends,
and the joint oversight of economic policy by a tripartite body representing
the Trades Union Congress, the Confederation of British Industry and the
Government, in return for trade union acquiescence in an incomes policy. We
were saved from this abomination by the conservatism and suspicion of the
TUC which perhaps could not believe that their ‘class enemy’ was prepared to
surrender without a fight.
No theory of government was ever given a fairer test or a more prolonged
experiment in a democratic country than democratic socialism received in

Britain. Yet it was a miserable failure in every respect. Far from reversing the
slow relative decline of Britain vis-à-vis its main industrial competitors, it
accelerated it. We fell further behind them, until by 1979 we were widely
dismissed as ‘the sick man of Europe’. The relative worsening of our economic
position was disguised by the rising affluence of the West as a whole. We,
among others, could hardly fail to benefit from the long economic expansion
of the post-war western world led by the United States. But if we never had it
so good, others — like Germany, France, Italy, Denmark — increasingly had it
better. And, as the 1970s wore grimly on, we began to fail in absolute as well
as relative terms.
Injections of monetary demand, which in the 1950s had produced a rise in
real production and a fall in unemployment before causing a modest rise in
prices, now went directly into high rates of inflation without so much as a
blip on the charts for production and unemployment. State subsidies and
direction of investment achieved progressively more inefficient industries and
ever lower returns on capital. Laws giving protective immunity to the trade
unions at the turn of the century were now abused to protect restrictive
practices and overmanning, to underpin strikes, and to coerce workers into
joining unions and participating in industrial action against their better
judgement. Welfare benefits, distributed with little or no consideration of
their effects on behaviour, encouraged illegitimacy, facilitated the breakdown
of families, and replaced incentives favouring work and self-reliance with
perverse encouragement for idleness and cheating. The final illusion — that
state intervention would promote social harmony and solidarity or, in Tory
language, ‘One Nation’ — collapsed in the ‘winter of discontent’ when the
dead went unburied, critically ill patients were turned away from hospitals by
pickets, and the prevailing social mood was one of snarling envy and
motiveless hostility. To cure the British disease with socialism was like trying
to cure leukaemia with leeches.
Another approach was needed — and for international reasons as well as
domestic ones. Britain’s weakened economic position meant that its
international role was bound to be cramped and strained as well. Our most
painful experience of the country’s reduced circumstances was the failure of
the Suez expedition in 1956. This was the result of political and economic
weakness rather than military failure, because the Government withdrew a
victorious force from the Canal Zone in response to a ‘run on the pound’
encouraged by the US Government. Whatever the details of this defeat,
however, it entered the British soul and distorted our perspective on Britain’s
place in the world.
We developed what might be called the ‘Suez syndrome’: having previously
exaggerated our power, we now exaggerated our impotence. Military and
diplomatic successes such as the war in Borneo — which preserved the
independence of former British colonies against Indonesian subversion, helped
to topple the anti-western dictator, Sukarno, and thus altered the long-term
balance of power in Asia in our interest — were either dismissed as trivial or
ignored altogether. Defeats, which in reality were the results of avoidable
misjudgement, such as the retreat from the Gulf in 1970, were held to be the
inevitable consequences of British decline. And comic opera enterprises, such
as Harold Wilson’s ‘invasion’ of Anguilla in March 1969 (for once, ‘police
action’ seems the right term) were gleefully seized upon to illustrate the
reality of reduced British power. The truth — that Britain was a middleranking power, given unusual influence by virtue of its historical distinction,
skilled diplomacy and versatile military forces, but greatly weakened by
economic decline — seemed too complex for sophisticated people to grasp.
They were determined to think themselves much weaker and more
contemptible than was in fact the case, and refused all comfort to the
contrary.

What made this more dangerous in the late 1970s was that the United
States was undergoing a similar crisis of morale following its failure in
Vietnam. In fact, the ‘Vietnam Syndrome’ was perhaps more debilitating than
its Suez counterpart because it embodied the conviction that the United States
was fortunately incapable of intervention abroad since such intervention
would almost certainly be inimical to morality, the world’s poor, or the
revolutionary tides of history. Hobbled by this psychological constraint and by
a Congress also deeply influenced by it, two presidents saw the Soviet Union
and its surrogates expand their power and influence in Afghanistan, southern
Africa and Central America by subversion and outright military invasion. In
Europe, an increasingly self-confident Soviet Union was planting offensive
missiles in its eastern satellites, building its conventional forces to levels far in
excess of NATO equivalents. It was also constructing a navy that would give it
global reach.
A theory, coined after the collapse of communism to justify the policy of
‘doves’ in the Cold War, holds that because the Soviet Union was
comparatively weak in the late 1980s, after almost a decade of western
economic and military revival, it must have been a hollow threat in the late
1970s. Quite apart from the logical absurdity of placing a cause after its
effect, the history of the Soviet Union from 1917 until just the other day
refutes this argument. The Soviet Union was a power which deliberately
inflicted economic backwardness on itself for political and ideological
reasons, but compensated for this by concentrating resources on its military
sector and by using the power this gave it to obtain further resources by force
or the threat of force. It would extort subsidized credits from a West anxious
for peace in periods of ‘thaw’, and seize new territories by subversion and
conquest in periods of ‘chill’. By the late 1970s, the US, Britain and our
European allies were faced by a Soviet Union in this second aggressive phase.
We were neither psychologically, nor militarily, nor economically in shape to
resist it.
Taken together, these three challenges — long-term economic decline, the
debilitating effects of socialism, and the growing Soviet threat — were an
intimidating inheritance for a new Prime Minister. I ought perhaps to have
been more cowed by them in my imagination than in fact I was as we drove
back to Flood Street. Perhaps if I could have foreseen the great roller-coaster
of events in the next eleven years, described in this volume, I would have felt
greater apprehension. Perversely, however, the emotion I felt was exhilaration
at the challenge. We had thought, talked, written, discussed, debated all these
questions — and now, if all went well in the next few weeks, we would finally
get the chance to deal with them ourselves.
Some of this exhilaration came from meeting a wide range of my fellowcountrymen in four years as Opposition Leader. They were so much better
than the statistics said: more energetic, more independent, more restive at the
decline of the country, and more ready than many of my parliamentary
colleagues to support painful measures to reverse that decline. We would
incur more odium, I believed, by reneging on our promises of radical
conservatism with a U-turn than by pressing firmly ahead through whatever
attacks the socialists hurled against us. I sensed, as apparently Jim Callaghan
also sensed in the course of the campaign, that a sea change had occurred in
the political sensibility of the British people. They had given up on socialism
— the thirty-year experiment had plainly failed — and were ready to try
something else. That sea change was our mandate.

And there was a more personal factor. Chatham* famously remarked: ‘I
know that I can save this country and that no one else can.’ It would have
been presumptuous of me to have compared myself to Chatham. But if I am
honest, I must admit that my exhilaration came from a similar inner
conviction.

My background and experience were not those of a traditional Conservative
prime minister. I was less able to depend on automatic deference, but I was
also perhaps less intimidated by the risks of change. My senior colleagues,
growing to political maturity in the slump of the 1930s, had a more resigned
and pessimistic view of political possibilities. They were perhaps too ready to
accept the Labour Party and union leaders as authentic interpreters of the
wishes of the people. I did not feel I needed an interpreter to address people
who spoke the same language. And I felt it was a real advantage that we had
lived the same sort of life.** I felt that the experiences I had lived through had
fitted me curiously well for the coming struggle.
I had grown up in a household that was neither poor nor rich. We had to
economize each day in order to enjoy the occasional luxury. My father’s
background as a grocer is sometimes cited as the basis for my economic
philosophy. So it was — and is — but his original philosophy encompassed
more than simply ensuring that incomings showed a small surplus over
outgoings at the end of the week. My father was both a practical man and a
man of theory. He liked to connect the progress of our corner shop with the
great complex romance of international trade which recruited people all over
the world to ensure that a family in Grantham could have on its table rice
from India, coffee from Kenya, sugar from the West Indies and spices from
five continents. Before I read a line from the great liberal economists, I knew
from my father’s accounts that the free market was like a vast sensitive
nervous system, responding to events and signals all over the world to meet
the ever-changing needs of peoples in different countries, from different
classes, of different religions, with a kind of benign indifference to their
status. Governments acted on a much smaller store of conscious information
and, by contrast, were themselves ‘blind forces’ blundering about in the dark,
and obstructing the operations of markets rather than improving them. The
economic history of Britain for the next forty years confirmed and amplified
almost every item of my father’s practical economics. In effect, I had been
equipped at an early age with the ideal mental outlook and tools of analysis
for reconstructing an economy ravaged by state socialism.

My life, like those of most people on the planet, was transformed by the
Second World War. In my case, because I was at school and university for its
duration, the transformation was an intellectual rather than a physical one. I
drew from the failure of appeasement the lesson that aggression must always
be firmly resisted. But how? The ultimate victory of the Allies persuaded me
that nations must co-operate in defence of agreed international rules if they
are either to resist great evils or to achieve great benefits. That is merely a
platitude, however, if political leaders lack the courage and farsightedness, or
— what is equally important — if nations lack strong bonds of common
loyalty. Weak nations could not have resisted Hitler effectively — indeed,
those nations that were weak did not stand up to him. So I drew from the
Second World War a lesson very different from the hostility towards the
nation-state evinced by some post-war European statesmen. My view was —
and is — that an effective internationalism can only be built by strong nations
which are able to call upon the loyalty of their citizens to defend and enforce
civilized rules of international conduct. An internationalism which seeks to
supersede the nation-state, however, will founder quickly upon the reality
that very few people are prepared to make genuine sacrifices for it. It is likely
to degenerate, therefore, into a formula for endless discussion and handwringing.
I held these conclusions very tentatively at the war’s end. But they
hardened into firm convictions in the 1940s and ’50s when, in the face of the
Soviet threat, those institutions like NATO which represented international
co-operation between strong nation-states proved far more effective in
resisting that threat than bodies like the United Nations which embodied a
superficially more ambitious but in reality weaker internationalism. My

concern in 1979 was that the resistance of NATO to the latest Soviet threat
was less adequate than I would have liked precisely because national morale
in most NATO countries, including Britain, was so depressed. To resist the
Soviet Union effectively it would be necessary to restore our own selfconfidence (and, of course, our military strength) beforehand.
I recalled a similar collapse of national morale from my first days in active
politics as a Young Conservative fighting the 1945–51 Labour Government.
Some nostalgia for the austerity period apparently lingers. That is, I believe,
an exercise in vicarious sacrifice, always more palatable than the real thing.
Seen from afar, or from above, whether by a socialist gentleman in Whitehall
or by a High Tory, socialism has a certain nobility: equal sacrifice, fair shares,
everyone pulling together. Seen from below, however, it looked very
different. Fair shares somehow always turn out to be small shares. Then,
someone has to enforce their fairness; someone else has to check that this
fairness does not result in black markets or under-the-counter favouritism;
and a third person has to watch the first two to make sure that the
administrators of fairness end up with no more than their fair share. All this
promotes an atmosphere of envy and tittle-tattle. No one who lived through
austerity, who can remember snoek, Spam, and utility clothing, could mistake
the petty jealousies, minor tyrannies, ill-neighbourliness and sheer sourness of
those years for idealism and equality. Even the partial dismantling of the
ration-book state in the early 1950s came as an immense psychological relief
to most people.
I particularly remember the political atmosphere of those years. Although
the Tory rethinking associated with Rab Butler and the Conservative Research
Department was important in reviving the Tory Party’s intellectual claims to
office, there was a somewhat more robust and elementary rethinking going on
at the grass roots. Our inspiration was less Rab Butler’s Industrial Charter than
books like Colm Brogan’s anti-socialist satire, Our New Masters, which held up
the moral pretensions of socialists to relentless and brilliant mockery, and
Hayek’s powerful Road to Serfdom, dedicated to ‘the socialists of all parties’.
Such books not only provided crisp, clear analytical arguments against
socialism, demonstrating how its economic theories were connected to the
then depressing shortages of our daily lives; but by their wonderful mockery
of socialist follies, they also gave us the feeling that the other side simply
could not win in the end. That is a vital feeling in politics; it eradicates past
defeats and builds future victories. It left a permanent mark on my own
political character, making me a long-term optimist for free enterprise and
liberty and sustaining me through the bleak years of socialist supremacy in
the 1960s and ’70s.
I was elected to the House of Commons in 1959 as the Member for
Finchley, and later served in the Governments of Harold Macmillan, Alec
Douglas-Home and Ted Heath. I enjoyed my early ministerial career: it was an
absorbing education both in the ways of Whitehall and in the technicalities of
pensions policy. But I could not help noticing a curious discrepancy in the
behaviour of my colleagues. What they said and what they did seemed to exist
in two separate compartments. It was not that they consciously deceived
anyone; they were in fact conspicuously honourable. But the language of free
enterprise, anti-socialism and the national interest sprang readily to their lips,
while they conducted government business on very different assumptions
about the role of the state at home and of the nation-state abroad. Their
rhetoric was prompted by general ideas they thought desirable, such as
freedom; their actions were confined by general ideas they thought inevitable,
such as equality.
At the start, as an inexperienced young minister, I had to live with this.
When we went into Opposition after the 1964 and 1966 defeats, I joined with
Ted Heath in a rethinking of party policy which seemed to foreshadow much
of what we later came to call Thatcherism. ‘Selsdon Man’ won the 1970

election on a radical Conservative manifesto.* But the Party’s conversion to its
own philosophy proved skin-deep. After two years of struggling to put it into
effect, the Heath Government changed course equally radically and adopted a
programme of corporatism, intervention and reflation. I had my doubts, but as
a first-time Cabinet minister I devoted myself principally to the major
controversies of my own department (Education), and left more senior
colleagues to get on with their own responsibilities. Yet all my instincts
chafed against this. Perhaps because of my very unease, I noticed earlier than
most that the very policies adopted as concessions to reality were also the
least successful. Incomes policy, in addition to restricting people’s freedom,
was invariably the prelude to a wages explosion. And that was one among
many. Almost all the policies hawked about by ‘practical’ men on ‘pragmatic’
grounds turned out in the end to be highly impractical. Yet this fact never
seemed to dent their enthusiasm. Indeed, Ted Heath responded to the defeat
of his Government on the issue of incomes policy in the first 1974 election by
proposing a still more ambitious scheme of interventionist government in the
second.
While I was pondering on this mystery, Keith Joseph made a remark which
reverberated powerfully in my mind. ‘I have only recently become a
Conservative,’ he said, meaning that for his first twenty years in politics,
many of them at the top, he had been a sort of moderate Fabian. I recognized
both the truth of Keith’s remark and also that my own case was subtly
different: I had always been an instinctive Conservative, but I had failed to
develop these instincts either into a coherent framework of ideas or into a set
of practical policies for government. And the faster the illusions of practical
men crumbled before the onrush of reality, the more necessary it was to set
about developing such a framework. Keith and I established the Centre for
Policy Studies to do just that.
With Keith, I had come to see ever more clearly that what appeared to be
technical arguments about the relationship between the stock of money and
the level of prices went right to the heart of the question of what the role of
government in a free society should be. It was the job of government to
establish a framework of stability — whether constitutional stability, the rule
of law, or the economic stability provided by sound money — within which
individual families and businesses were free to pursue their own dreams and
ambitions. We had to get out of the business of telling people what their
ambitions should be and how exactly to realize them. That was up to them.
The conclusions I reached fitted precisely those which my own instincts and
experience themselves suggested. But I was aware that all too few of my
colleagues in the Shadow Cabinet and in the House of Commons saw matters
like this. I knew that I would have to go carefully to persuade them of what
needed to be done and why.
The years in Opposition had often been frustrating, but at least they had
given me the chance to see that our policies for government reflected my
priorities and had been worked out in sufficient detail. We had published the
outlines of our policy in The Right Approach in 1976 and The Right Approach to
the Economy the following year. We had toyed with the idea of other similar
documents, but had in fact come down in favour of speeches to set out our
policy proposals. Behind the public pronouncements lay years of intense work
by policy groups, usually chaired by the relevant Chief Shadow Spokesmen,
whose conclusions were brought before the Leader’s Consultative Committee,
as the Shadow Cabinet was formally known, where policies were discussed,
modified, rejected or approved.

There were three points to which I had returned again and again during this
period. First, everything we wished to do had to fit into the overall strategy of
reversing Britain’s economic decline, for without an end to that decline there
was no hope of success for our other objectives. This led on to the second
point: all policies had to be carefully costed, and if they could not be

accommodated within our public expenditure plans they would not be
approved. Geoffrey Howe and his very talented Shadow Treasury team
combed through everything in great detail to ensure this was the case. Finally,
we had to stress continually that, however difficult the road might be and
however long it took us to reach our destination, we intended to achieve a
fundamental change of direction. We stood for a new beginning, not more of
the same.

I was again asking the Conservative Party to put its faith in freedom and
free markets, limited government and a strong national defence; I knew that
we would be able to keep the Party united around this programme for the
election campaign. But in the dark days which would precede tangible success
I would have to struggle to ensure that this time the Conservative Government
kept its nerve. If we failed, we would never be given another chance.
I was preoccupied by these reflections as we drove home, had a small
family celebration at Flood Street, and finally turned in for the night. My last
thought was: the die is cast. We had made every sensible preparation for the
election and for governing afterwards. If honest endeavour were the test, we
would not fail. In the end, however, Man proposes and God disposes. We
might deserve success, but we could not command it. It was, perversely, a
comforting thought. I slept well.
A political term dating from the early 1950s, denoting a consensus politician
combining the moderate Conservatism of R. A. Butler with the moderate
socialism of Hugh Gaitskell.
*

*

The eighteenth-century statesman and prime minister, 1766–8.

**

The first fifty years of my life will be related in a second volume.

The term was Harold Wilson’s, derived from the name of the Selsdon Park
Hotel where the Conservative Shadow Cabinet finalized its right-wing
programme for the 1970 general election.
*

CHAPTER I

Over the Shop
First days and early decisions as Prime Minister

TO THE PALACE
We knew we had won by the early hours of Friday 4 May, but it was
not until the afternoon that we gained the clear majority of seats we
needed — 44 as it eventually turned out. The Conservative Party
would form the next government.
There were many friends with me as we waited for the results to
come in during those long hours in Conservative Central Office. But I
can remember an odd sense of loneliness as well as anticipation when
I received the telephone call which summoned me to the Palace. I was
anxious about getting the details of procedure and protocol right; it is
extraordinary how on really important occasions one’s mind often
focuses on what in the cold light of day seem to be mere trivia. But I
was haunted by tales of embarrassing episodes as one prime minister
left and his successor entered office: Ted Heath’s departure from No.
10 was a case in point. I now could not help feeling sorry for James
Callaghan, who just a little earlier had conceded victory in a short
speech, both dignified and generous. Whatever our past and indeed
future disagreements, I believed him to be a patriot with the interests
of Britain at heart, whose worst tribulations had been inflicted by his
own party.
At about 2.45 p.m. the call came. I walked out of Central Office
through a crowd of supporters and into the waiting car, which drove
Denis and me to the Palace on my last journey as Leader of the
Opposition.
The Audience at which one receives the Queen’s authority to form a
government comes to most prime ministers only once in a lifetime.
The authority is unbroken when a sitting prime minister wins an
election, and so it never had to be renewed throughout the years I was
in office. All audiences with the Queen take place in strict confidence
— a confidentiality which is vital to the working of both government
and constitution. I was to have such audiences with Her Majesty once
a week, usually on a Tuesday, when she was in London and sometimes
elsewhere when the royal family were at Windsor or Balmoral.
Perhaps it is permissible to make just two points about these
meetings. Anyone who imagines that they are a mere formality or
confined to social niceties is quite wrong; they are quietly businesslike
and Her Majesty brings to bear a formidable grasp of current issues
and breadth of experience. And, although the press could not resist the

temptation to suggest disputes between the Palace and Downing
Street, especially on Commonwealth affairs, I always found the
Queen’s attitude towards the work of the government absolutely
correct.
Of course, under the circumstances, stories of clashes between ‘two
powerful women’ were just too good not to make up. In general, more
nonsense was written about the so-called ‘feminine factor’ during my
time in office than about almost anything else. I was always asked how
it felt to be a woman prime minister. I would reply: ‘I don’t know: I’ve
never experienced the alternative.’
After the audience, Sir Philip Moore, the Queen’s Secretary, took me
to his office down what are called the ‘the Prime Minister’s stairs’. I
found my new principal private secretary, Ken Stowe, waiting there,
ready to accompany me to Downing Street. Ken had come to the
Palace with the outgoing prime minister, James Callaghan, barely an
hour before. The civil service already knew a good deal about our
policies because they carefully scrutinize an Opposition’s manifesto
with a view to the hasty preparation of a new administration’s
legislative programme. Of course, as I quickly learnt, some senior civil
servants would need more than a conscientious reading of our
manifesto and a few speeches truly to grasp the changes we firmly
intended to make. Also, it takes time to build up relationships with
staff which reach beyond the formal level of respect to trust and
confidence. But the sheer professionalism of the British civil service,
which allows governments to come and go with a minimum of
dislocation and a maximum of efficiency, is something other countries
with different systems have every cause to envy.
Denis and I left Buckingham Palace in the prime ministerial car: my
previous car had already gone to Mr Callaghan. As we drove out
through the Palace gates, Denis noticed that this time the Guards
saluted me. In those innocent days before security had to become so
much tighter for fear of terrorism, crowds of well-wishers, sightseers,
press and camera crews were waiting for us in Downing Street itself.
The crowds extended all the way up Downing Street and out into
Whitehall. Denis and I got out of the car and walked towards them.
This gave me the opportunity to run through in my mind what I would
say outside No. 10.
When we turned to the cameras and reporters, the cheers were so
deafening that no one in the street could hear what I was saying.
Fortunately, the microphones thrust in front of me picked it up and
carried it over the radio and television.
I quoted a famous prayer attributed to St Francis of Assisi,
beginning, ‘where there is discord, may we bring harmony.’
Afterwards a good deal of sarcasm was expended on this choice, but
the rest of the quotation is often forgotten. St Francis prayed for more
than peace; the prayer goes on: ‘Where there is error, may we bring
truth. Where there is doubt, may we bring faith. And where there is

despair, may we bring hope’. The forces of error, doubt and despair
were so firmly entrenched in British society, as the ‘winter of
discontent’ had just powerfully illustrated, that overcoming them
would not be possible without some measure of discord.
10 DOWNING STREET
Inside No. 10 all the staff had turned out to welcome us. I am assured
that in the days before television there was a good practical reason for
this ceremony, in that everyone in the building has to be able to
recognize the prime minister personally, both for security reasons and
for the smooth running of the many different services which are
provided there. It is also true that within No. 10 there is almost a
family atmosphere. The number of staff is relatively small — a total of
between 70 or 80, though because of the shift system not all will be
there at one time. That figure comprises those working in the Private
Office, including the duty clerks who ensure that No. 10 is able to
operate round the clock; the Press Office, where someone is also
always on call; the ‘garden room girls’ who do the secretarial and
paperwork; ‘confidential filing’, which sorts and files the enormous
accumulations of documents; the parliamentary section which deals
with Parliamentary Questions, Statements and Debates; the
correspondence section where some four to seven thousand letters are
received every week; the sections which deal with Church matters and
with honours; the Political Office and the Policy Unit; and the
messengers and other staff who keep the whole extended family
supplied with tea and coffee and — above all — information from the
outside world. It is an extraordinary achievement, and it requires
people of unusual qualities and commitment, not least when you
compare these relatively slender resources and modest surroundings
with, for example, the White House with its 400 staff, or the German
Chancellery with 500.
The prime minister’s private secretaries, headed by the principal
private secretary, are crucial to the effective conduct of government.
They are the main channel of communication between the prime
minister and the rest of Whitehall, and they bear a heavy burden of
responsibility. I was fortunate to have a succession of superb principal
private secretaries over the years. Other private secretaries,
specializing in economic or foreign affairs, also quickly acquired
judgement, expertise and a knowledge of my thinking which allowed
me to rely on them. Bernard Ingham, my press secretary, who arrived
five months after I became Prime Minister, was another indispensable
member of the team. I was told that Bernard’s politics had been
Labour, not Conservative: but the first time we met I warmed to this
tough, blunt, humorous Yorkshireman. Bernard’s outstanding virtue
was his total integrity. An honest man himself, he expected the same
high standards from others. He never let me down.

The hours at No. 10 are long. I never minded this. There was an
intensity about the job of being Prime Minister which made sleep seem
a luxury. In any case, over the years I had trained myself to do with
about four hours a night. The Private Office too would often be
working till 11 o’clock at night. We were so few that there was no
possibility of putting work on someone else’s desk. This sort of
atmosphere helps to produce a remarkably happy team, as well as a
formidably efficient one. People are under great pressure, and there is
no time for trivia. All the effort has to go into getting the work done.
Mutual respect and friendly relations are often the result. This feature
of No. 10 shapes people’s attitudes not only towards each other but
towards the prime minister whom they all directly or indirectly serve.
The cheers and clapping when a new prime minister arrives may
perhaps be a traditional formality. But the tears and regrets when the
outgoing prime minister makes his or her final departure are usually
genuine.
Of course, I had visited No. 10 when I served as Education Secretary
in Ted Heath’s Government of 1970–4 and, indeed, before that as a
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Pensions in Harold
Macmillan’s and Alec Douglas-Home’s Governments. So I knew that
the house is much larger than it looks from the outside because it is, in
fact, two houses, one situated behind the other, joined by passages,
with an extra wing linking the two buildings. But although familiar
with the reception rooms and the Cabinet Room, I knew little of the
rest of the building.
LIFE ‘OVER THE SHOP’
Number Ten is more than an office: it is intended to serve as the prime
minister’s home. I never had any doubt that when the Callaghans had
left I would move into the prime minister’s small flat at the top of the
building. Every practical consideration suggested it, as well as my own
taste for long hours of work. As we used to say, harking back to my
girlhood in Grantham, I liked living over the shop. I was not able to
move out of the house in Flood Street where my family had been
living for the last ten years until the first week of June. But from then,
until November 1990, Downing Street and Chequers were the twin
centres of my personal and professional life.
The flat at No. 10 quickly became a refuge from the rest of the
world, though on occasion a good deal of business was done there too.
It was right at the top of the building — up in the rafters, in fact. But
that was an advantage, for the stairs provided me with about the only
real exercise I got. There were plenty of cupboards and a box room in
which to dump everything until it found a more permanent place and
into which piles of books and papers could be pushed when visitors
were due.

Denis and I decided that we would not have any living-in domestic
help. No housekeeper could possibly have coped with the irregular
hours. When I had no other engagement, I would go up to the flat for
a quick lunch of salad or poached egg on Bovril toast. But usually it
was 10 or 11 o’clock at night when I would go into the kitchen and
prepare something — we knew every way in which eggs and cheese
could be served and there was always something to cut at in the fridge
— while Denis poured me a night-cap.
The deep freeze was always kept well stocked and the microwave,
when it appeared, did sterling work when sudden meals were required
because we were working late into the night on a speech, a statement
or decisions required for the Falklands campaign or the Libyan raid —
or Resolutions at the UN Security Council. On these occasions we used
the small dining-room in the flat, which was next to the even smaller
kitchen; secretaries from the Political Office, not paid by the taxpayer,
would always lend a hand.
Prime Minister or not, I never forgot that I was also MP for Finchley;
nor, indeed, would I have wanted to. My monthly surgeries in the
constituency and the correspondence which was dealt with from
within No. 10 by my secretary, Joy Robilliard (who had been Airey
Neave’s secretary until his death), kept me directly in touch with
people’s worries. I always had the benefit of a first-class constituency
agent and a strongly supportive constituency chairman, which as any
MP knows makes a world of difference. I also kept up my own special
interests which had been developed as a result of constituency work,
for example as patron of the North London Hospice.
I could never have been Prime Minister for more than eleven years
without Denis at my side. Always a powerful personality, he had very
definite ideas about what should and should not be done. He was a
fund of shrewd advice and penetrating comment. And he very sensibly
saved these for me rather than the outside world, always refusing to
give interviews. He never had a secretary or public relations adviser
but answered between thirty and fifty letters every week in his own
hand. With the appearance of the ‘Dear Bill’ letters in Private Eye he
seemed to become half the nation’s favourite correspondent.
Denis shared my own fascination with politics — that, of course, is
how we first met — but he also had his own outside interests, not least
sport. He was passionately interested in rugby football — having
indeed been a referee. He was also heavily involved in charities, an
active member of the Sports Aid Foundation and of the Lord’s
Taverners. Denis delivered many speeches on his favourite
(nonpolitical) subjects. The one which for me best summed up his
character and convictions was on sport and ethics and contained these
lines:
The desire to win is born in most of us. The will to win is a matter of
training. The manner of winning is a matter of honour.

Although Denis had a deep interest in everything military, and by
choice would have stayed in the army at the end of the Second World
War, the unexpected death of his father left him with no option but to
return to run the family business, a paint and chemicals company. I
am glad he did. For his industrial experience was invaluable to me.
Not only was he familiar with the scientific side (something which we
had in common); he was also a crack cost and management
accountant. Nothing escaped his professional eye — he could see and
sense trouble long before anyone else. His knowledge of the oil
industry also gave me immediate access to expert advice when in 1979
the world experienced the second sudden oil price increase. Indeed,
through him and our many friends I was never out of touch with
industry and commerce.
Being prime minister is a lonely job. In a sense, it ought to be: you
cannot lead from the crowd. But with Denis there I was never alone.
What a man. What a husband. What a friend.
INSIDE DOWNING STREET
In some ways 10 Downing Street is an unusual sort of home. Portraits,
busts and sculptures of one’s prime ministerial predecessors remind
one of the nearly 250 years of history into which one has stepped.
As prime minister one has the opportunity to make an impact on the
style of No. 10. Outside the flat I had displayed my own collection of
porcelain, which I had built up over the years. I also brought with me
a powerful portrait of Churchill from my room in the House of
Commons. It looked down on those who assembled in the
antechamber to the Cabinet Room. When I arrived, this area looked
rather like a down-at-heel Pall Mall club, with heavy and worn leather
furniture; I changed the whole feel by bringing in bookcases, tables
and chairs from elsewhere in the building. There might be some
difficult times to come in the Cabinet Room itself, but there was no
reason why people should be made to feel miserable while they were
waiting to go in.
Although it was not until I had been there some ten years that I had
the most important redecorations done, I tried from the start to make
the rooms seem more lived in. The official rooms had very few
ornaments and when we arrived No. 10 looked rather like a ‘furnished
house to let’, which in a way, I suppose, it was. Downing Street had no
silver. Whenever there was an official dinner the caterers had to bring
in their own. Lord Brownlow, who lived just outside Grantham, lent
me silver from his collection at Belton House: it sparkled and
transformed the No. 10 dining-room. One particular piece had a
special meaning for me — a casket containing the Freedom of the
Borough of Grantham, of which both the previous Lord Brownlow and
later my father had been Mayor. The gardeners who kept St James’s

Park brought in flowers. And happily, the flowers kept on coming, sent
by friends and supporters, right until my last days at Downing Street,
when you could hardly move down the corridors for a floral display
which rivalled the Chelsea Flower Show. I also had the study
repapered at my own expense. Its unappealing sage-green damask
flock wallpaper was stripped off and replaced by a cream stripe, which
was a much better background for some fine pictures.
I felt that Downing Street should have some works by contemporary
British artists and sculptors, as well as those of the past. I had met
Henry Moore when I was Secretary of State for Education and much
admired his work. The Moore Foundation let No. 10 borrow one of his
smaller sculptures which fitted perfectly in an alcove in the main
hallway. Behind the sculpture was hung a Moore drawing, which was
changed every three months; among my favourites were scenes of
people sleeping in the London Underground during the Blitz.
I was conscious of being the first research scientist to become prime
minister — almost as conscious, in fact, as I was of being the first
woman prime minister. So I had portraits and busts of some of our
most famous scientists placed in the small dining-room, where I often
lunched with visitors and colleagues on less formal occasions.
I felt strongly that when foreign visitors came to Downing Street
they should see something of Britain’s cultural heritage. When I came
to No. 10 all the paintings in the main dining-room were copies. They
were replaced. For example, I was lent a picture of George II, who had
actually given No. 10 to Sir Robert Walpole, the first prime minister.
On my foreign visits I quickly found that many of our embassies had
superb works of art which added greatly to the impression people had
of Britain. I wanted foreign visitors to No. 10 to be similarly
impressed. I knew that there were large numbers of excellent British
paintings in our museums which were not on show. I was able to
borrow some Turners, a Raeburn from Scotland and some pictures
from the Dulwich Gallery and these were hung in the White Drawing
Room and the main reception room. I also had some fine portraits
hung of the nation’s heroes; through them you could feel the
continuity of British history. I recall on one occasion watching
President Giscard d’Estaing gazing at two portraits in the dining-room
— one of the young Nelson and the other of Wellington. He remarked
on the irony. I replied that it was no less ironic that I should have to
look at portraits of Napoleon on my visits to Paris. In retrospect, I can
see that this was not quite a parallel. Napoleon lost.
On this first evening, though, I could do little more than make a
brief tour of the main rooms of the building. Then I entered the
Cabinet Room where I was greeted by more familiar faces — among
them my daughter Carol. There was Richard Ryder who had been and
would continue for a time as my political secretary, responsible for
keeping me in touch with the Conservative Party in the country; David
Wolfson (now Lord Wolfson) who acted as my Chief of Staff, bringing

to bear his charm and business experience on the problems of running
No. 10; Caroline Stephens (later to become Caroline Ryder) who
became my diary secretary; Alison Ward (later Alison Wakeham) my
constituency secretary; and Cynthia Crawford — known to all of us as
‘Crawfie’ — who acted as my personal assistant and who has stayed
with me ever since. We did not waste much time in conversation. They
were anxious to sort out who was to go to which office. I had exactly
the same task in mind: the choice of my Cabinet.
CABINET-MAKING
Choosing a Cabinet is undoubtedly one of the most important ways in
which a prime minister can exercise power over the whole conduct of
government. But it is not always understood how real are the
constraints under which the choices take place. By convention, all
ministers must be members of either the Commons or the Lords, and
there must not generally be more than three Cabinet members in the
Lords, thus limiting the range of potential candidates for office. In
addition one has to achieve distribution across the country — every
region is easily convinced it has been left out. You must also consider
the spectrum of party opinion.
Even so, the press expect the Cabinet of some twenty-two ministers
to be appointed and the list to be published within about 24 hours —
otherwise it is taken as a sure sign of some sort of political crisis. My
American and other foreign friends are often astonished at the speed
with which British Governments are formed and announced.
So I do not think that any of us at No. 10 relaxed much that day,
which turned out to be a long one. (The previous night I had had no
more than a couple of hours’ sleep, if that.) I received the usual
detailed security briefing which is given to incoming prime ministers.
Then I went upstairs to the study in which I was to spend so many
hours in the years which followed. I was accompanied by Willie
Whitelaw and our new Chief Whip, Michael Jopling. We began to sift
through the obvious and less obvious names and slowly this most
perplexing of jigsaws began to take shape. While Willie, the Chief
Whip and I discussed the appointments to the Cabinet, Ken Stowe
sought to contact those involved to arrange for them to come in the
next day.
At 8.30 p.m. we took a break for a meal. Knowing that there were
no canteen facilities at No. 10, my personal staff brought in a Chinese
meal from a take-away and some fifteen of us sat down to eat in the
large dining-room. (That, I think, was the last take-away while I was
Prime Minister.)
I knew that the hardest battles would be fought on the ground of
economic policy. So I made sure that the key economic ministers
would be true believers in our economic strategy. Geoffrey Howe had

by now thoroughly established himself as the Party’s chief economic
spokesman. Geoffrey was regularly bullied in debate by Denis Healey.
But by thorough mastery of his brief and an ability to marshal
arguments and advice from different sources, he had shown that
beneath a deceptively mild exterior he had the makings of the fine
Chancellor he was to become. Some of the toughest decisions were to
fall to him. He never flinched. In my view these were his best political
years.
After becoming leader in 1975, I had considered appointing Keith
Joseph as Shadow Chancellor. Keith had done more than anyone else
to spell out in his speeches and pamphlets what had gone wrong with
Britain’s economic performance and how it could be transformed. He
has one of the best minds in politics. He is an original thinker, the sort
of man who makes you understand what Burke meant when he wrote
of politics being ‘philosophy in action’. He is rare in another way too:
he combines humility, open-mindedness and unshakeable principle.
He is deeply and genuinely sensitive to people’s misfortunes. Although
he had no doubt of the Tightness of the decisions which we were to
make, he knew that they meant unviable firms would collapse and
overmanning become unemployment, and he cared about those who
were affected — far more than did all our professionally
compassionate critics. But such a combination of personal qualities
may create difficulties in the cruel hurly-burly of political life which
Chancellors above all must endure. So Keith took over at Industry,
where he did the vital job that no one else could have done of altering
the whole philosophy which had previously dominated the
department. Keith was — and remains — my closest political friend.
John Biffen I appointed Chief Secretary to the Treasury. He had
been a brilliant exponent in Opposition of the economic policies in
which I believed and, before that, a courageous critic of the Heath
Government’s U-turn. But he proved rather less effective than I had
hoped in the gruelling task of trying to control public expenditure. His
later performance as Leader of the House where the qualities required
were acute political sensitivity, good humour and a certain style was
far happier. John Nott became Secretary of State for Trade. He, too,
had a clear understanding of and commitment to our policies of
monetary control, low taxes and free enterprise. But John is a mixture
of gold, dross and mercury. No one was better at analysing a situation
and prescribing a policy to deal with it. But he found it hard, or
perhaps boring, to stick with the policy once it had been firmly
decided. His vice was second thoughts.
With Geoffrey and Keith helping me to give a lead to the Cabinet,
however, and with the loyalty I knew I could rely upon from Willie
and some of the others, I believed we could see the economic strategy
through.
Otherwise, it seemed prudent in the light of our effective
performance in Opposition and the election campaign to maintain a

high degree of continuity between Shadow Cabinet and Cabinet posts.
Willie Whitelaw became Home Secretary, and in that capacity and
later as Leader of the Lords he provided me personally and the
Government as a whole with shrewd advice based on massive
experience. People were often surprised that the two of us worked so
well together, given our rivalry for the leadership and our different
outlook on economics. But Willie is a big man in character as well as
physically. He wanted the success of the Government which from the
first he accepted would be guided by my general philosophy. Once he
had pledged his loyalty, he never withdrew it. He supported me
steadfastly when I was right and, more important, when I wasn’t. He
was an irreplaceable deputy prime minister — an office which has no
constitutional existence but is a clear sign of political precedence —
and the ballast that helped keep the Government on course.
But I felt that some changes in portfolios were required. I brought in
the formidable Christopher Soames to be Leader of the House of Lords.
Christopher was his own man, indeed excessively so, and thus better
suited to solo performances — whether as Ambassador in Paris or the
last Governor of Rhodesia — than to working in harmony with others.
Peter Carrington, who had led the Lords skilfully in Opposition,
became Foreign Secretary. His unrivalled experience of foreign affairs
more than qualified him for the job. Peter had great panache and the
ability to identify immediately the main points in any argument; and
he could express himself in pungent terms. We had disagreements, but
there were never any hard feelings. We were an effective combination
— not least because Peter could always tell some particularly
intractable foreign minister that whatever he himself might feel about
a particular proposition, there was no way in which his prime minister
would accept it. This generally proved convincing. I was determined,
however, that at least one Foreign Office minister should have a good
grounding in — and sound views on — economic policy. I had Peter
bring in Nick Ridley.
Two other appointments excited more comment. To his surprise, I
asked Peter Walker to be Minister of Agriculture. Peter had never
made a secret of his hostility to my economic strategy. But he was
both tough and persuasive, priceless assets in dealing with the plain
absurdities of the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy.
His membership of the Cabinet demonstrated that I was prepared to
include every strand of Conservative opinion in the new Government,
and his post that I was not prepared to put the central economic
strategy at risk.
That was perhaps less clear in my decision to keep Jim Prior on at
Employment. I shall describe elsewhere the divergences of opinion
between Jim and the rest of us during Opposition. Running on from
that time there was a lively argument about trade union reform. We
all agreed that trade unions had acquired far too many powers and
privileges. We also agreed that these must be dealt with one step at a

time. But when it came down to specific measures, there was deep
disagreement about how fast and how far to move. Yet there was no
doubt in my mind that we needed Jim Prior. There was still the feeling
in the country, and indeed in the Conservative Party, that Britain
could not be governed without the tacit consent of the trades unions.
It was to be some years before that changed. If we had signalled the
wholesale reform of the unions over and against their opposition at the
outset, it would have undermined confidence in the Government and
perhaps even provoked a challenge we were not yet ready to face. Jim
was the badge of our reasonableness. He had forged good relations
with a number of trade union leaders whose practical value he perhaps
overestimated. But he was an experienced politician and a strong
personality — qualities he subsequently demonstrated to great effect
in Northern Ireland.
The law prescribes that only twenty-two people may receive the
salaries of Cabinet ministers. My decision to appoint a Foreign
Secretary from the House of Lords meant that we had to have an
additional Foreign minister in the Cabinet to answer in the Commons.
Members of the House of Commons in any case dislike seeing too
many Members of the Lords in the Cabinet. They accept, of course,
that the Leader of the Lords and the Lord Chancellor (in this case the
distinguished and effervescent Quintin Hailsham) and possibly a third
peer of obvious suitability must be in the Cabinet. But they demand
that there must be a second Cabinet minister in the Commons to
answer for any departmental head who is a peer. In this post I
appointed Ian Gilmour. (A similar arrangement would later be
necessary when David Young joined the Cabinet, first at Employment
and then at Trade and Industry.) Ian remained at the Foreign Office
for two years. Subsequently, he was to show me the same loyalty from
the back-benches as he had in government.
I was anxious to have Angus Maude in the Cabinet to benefit from
his years of political experience, his sound views, and his acid wit. He
would handle government information. At the end of the day, we were
short of one place. As a result, Norman Fowler, as Minister of State at
Transport, was not able to be an official member of the Cabinet,
although he attended all our meetings.
By about 11 p.m. the list of Cabinet was complete and had been
approved by the Queen. I went upstairs to thank the No. 10
telephonists who had had a busy time arranging all the appointments
for the following day. Then I was driven home.
On Saturday I saw the future Cabinet one by one. It all went
smoothly enough. Those who were not already Privy Councillors were
sworn in at Buckingham Palace.* By Saturday afternoon the Cabinet
was appointed and the names announced to the press. That gave every
new minister the weekend to draft instructions to his department to
put into effect the manifesto policies. In fact there was slightly more
time than usual, since Monday was a Bank Holiday.

OTHER APPOINTMENTS
On Saturday night we completed the list of junior ministers, and I saw
or telephoned them on the Sunday. Many of these would later enter
Cabinet, including Cecil Parkinson, Norman Tebbit, Nick Ridley and
John Wakeham. The best junior ministers were always in great
demand by their seniors: a really good ministerial team is of enormous
importance in keeping effective political control over the work of a
government department. There were some sixty posts to be filled. But
the whole Government had been appointed and announced within 48
hours of my entering Downing Street.

My last and best appointment was of Ian Gow as my Parliamentary
Private Secretary (or PPS). Ian’s combination of loyalty, shrewdness
and an irrepressible sense of fun was to see us all through many
difficult moments. He was an instinctive parliamentarian who loved
every aspect of the House of Commons. In private conversation he had
the ability to draw everyone into the political circle and make them
feel theirs was the vital contribution. In public his speeches were
marked by a deadpan humour which could reduce both sides of the
House to tears of laughter. We remained close friends after Ian’s
principled resignation over the Anglo-Irish agreement which he
opposed from a standpoint of undiluted Unionism. His murder by IRA
terrorists in 1990 was an irreplaceable loss.
Monday was, as I have noted, a Bank Holiday. I came into No. 10
and took the opportunity to complete a number of nonministerial
appointments. John Hoskyns arrived in the afternoon to become head
of my Policy Unit.* John’s background was in business and computers;
but over and above that experience, he had strong powers of analysis
and had helped formulate our economic strategy in Opposition. He
propagated the theory that a ‘culture of decline’ was the ultimate
cause of many of Britain’s economic problems. In government he
repeatedly compelled ministers to relate each problem to our overall
strategy of reversing that decline. He kept our eye on the ball.
That same day I saw Kenneth Berrill, the head of the Central Policy
Review Staff (CPRS) or ‘Think-Tank’. The CPRS had originally been set
up by Ted Heath as a source of long-term policy advice for the
Government, at a time when there were fewer private think-tanks,
fewer special advisers in government and a widespread belief that the
great questions of the day could be resolved by specialized technical
analysis. But a government with a firm philosophical direction was
inevitably a less comfortable environment for a body with a
technocratic outlook. And the Think-Tank’s detached speculations,
when leaked to the press and attributed to ministers, had the capacity
to embarrass. The world had changed, and the CPRS could not change
with it. For these and other reasons, I believe that my later decision to
abolish the CPRS was right and probably inevitable. And I have to say

that I never missed it.
I also asked Sir Derek Rayner to set up an Efficiency Unit that would
tackle the waste and ineffectiveness of government. Derek was another
successful businessman, from what everyone used to describe as my
favourite company, Marks & Spencer. The two of us used to say that in
politics you judge the value of a service by the amount you put in, but
in business you judge it by the amount you get out. We were both
convinced of the need to bring some of the attitudes of business into
government. We neither of us conceived just how difficult this would
prove.
On the same day I saw Sir Richard O’Brien on a matter which
illustrates the extraordinary range of topics which crossed my desk in
these first days. Sir Richard was not only chairman of the Manpower
Services Commission, the QUANGO which supervised the nation’s
training schemes,* but also chairman of the committee to advise the
prime minister on the appointment of a new Archbishop of
Canterbury. (Donald Coggan had announced his intention to retire; his
successor had to be found by the end of the year.) He informed me
about the committee’s work and gave me an idea of when it would be
ready to make its recommendations. In view of my later relations with
the hierarchy, I could wish that Sir Richard had combined his two jobs
and established a decent training scheme for bishops.
It was the nation’s financial and economic affairs, however, which
required immediate attention. Sir John Hunt, the Cabinet Secretary,
gave a reassuring impression of quiet efficiency which turned out to be
entirely accurate. He had prepared a short brief on the most urgent
questions, such as public sector pay and the size of the Public Sector
Borrowing Requirement (PSBR), and compiled a list of imminent
meetings with other heads of government. Each of these required early
decisions to be made. My last appointment that Monday afternoon was
with Geoffrey Howe to discuss his forthcoming budget. That night —
most unusually — I managed to get back to Flood Street for dinner
with the family. But there was no let-up in activity. I had a stack of
papers to read on every conceivable subject.
Or so it seemed. The ceaseless flow of red despatch boxes had begun
— anything up to three each evening and four at weekends. But I set
to with a will. There is never another opportunity like that given to a
new government with a fresh electoral mandate to place its stamp
firmly on public affairs, and I was determined to take advantage of it.
EARLY DECISIONS
On Tuesday at 2.30 p.m. we held our first Cabinet meeting. It was
‘informal’: no agenda had been prepared by the Cabinet Secretariat
and no minutes were taken. (Its conclusions were later recorded in the
first ‘formal’ Cabinet which met on the customary Thursday morning.)

Ministers reported on their departments and the preparations they had
made for forthcoming legislation. We gave immediate effect to the
pledges in our manifesto to see that both the police and the armed
forces were properly paid. As a result of the crisis of morale in the
police service, the fall in recruitment and talk of a possible police
strike, the Labour Government had set up a committee on police pay
under Lord Justice Edmund Davies. The committee had devised a
formula to keep police pay in line with other earnings. We decided
that the recommendations for pay increases due for implementation on
1 November should be brought forward. This was duly announced the
following day, Wednesday. We similarly decided that the full military
salary recommended by the latest Report of the Armed Forces Pay
Review Body should be paid in full, as from 1 April.
At that first informal Cabinet we began the painful but necessary
process of shrinking down the public sector after years in which it was
assumed that it should grow at the expense of the private sector. So we
imposed an immediate freeze on all civil service recruitment, though
this would later be modified and specific targets for reduction set. We
started a review of the controls imposed by central on local
government, though here, too, we would in due course be forced down
the path of applying still tougher, financial controls, as the inability or
refusal of local councils to run services efficiently became increasingly
apparent.
Pay and prices were an immediate concern, as they continued to be
throughout those economically troubled early years. Professor Hugh
Clegg’s Commission on Pay Comparability had been appointed by the
Labour Government as a respectable means of bribing public sector
workers not to strike with postdated cheques due to be presented after
the election. The Clegg Commission was a major headache, and the
pain became steadily more acute as the cheques fell due. *
As regards pay bargaining in the nationalized industries, we decided
that the responsible ministers should stand back from the process as
far as possible. Our strategy would be to apply the necessary financial
discipline and then let the management and unions directly involved
make their own decisions. But that would require progress in
complementary areas — competition, privatization and trade union
reform — before it was to show results.
There would also have to be a fundamental overhaul of the way in
which prices were controlled by such interventionist measures as the
Price Commission, government pressure, and subsidy. We were under
no illusion: price rises were a symptom of underlying inflation, not a
cause of it. Inflation was a monetary phenomenon which it would
require monetary discipline to curb. Artificially holding down
increases merely reduced investment and undermined profits — both
already far too low for the country’s economic health — while
spreading a ‘cost plus’ mentality through British industry.

At both Cabinets, I concluded by emphasizing the need for collective
responsibility and confidentiality between ministers. I said I had no
intention of keeping a diary of Cabinet discussions and I hoped that
others would follow my example. Inconvenient as that may be for the
authors of memoirs, it is the only satisfactory rule for government. But
I had to repeat this warning against leaks many times.
We were still in the first week of government, but we had to decide
the content of the first Queen’s Speech. This was largely the task of
‘QL’,* the Cabinet committee chaired by Willie Whitelaw, which was
responsible for making recommendations to the Cabinet on legislation
for inclusion in the Queen’s Speech. We were fortunate that our
manifesto commitments had been so clear; the Queen’s Speech almost
wrote itself.
In all this activity of government-making and policy-setting,
however, I knew I could not afford to neglect the back-benchers. After
twenty years in the House of Commons, through six Parliaments, I had
seen how suddenly trouble could arise and the business of the House
be put in jeopardy. So on Tuesday evening, before Parliament
assembled the following day, I had invited the Chairman and Officers
of the 1922 Committee for a talk, to celebrate our victory and discuss
the work of the coming parliamentary session.* The name — which is
usually abbreviated to ‘the ‘22’ — commemorates the events of that
year, when Conservative back-benchers forced the resignation of Lloyd
George’s coalition Government, bringing about a general election and
the return of a Conservative administration under Bonar Law. It should
remind anyone who is inclined to doubt it of the ‘22’s importance to
government. Even in less stormy times, a heavy legislative programme
is only possible when there is a good working understanding between
No. 10, the ‘22, the Whips’ Office and the Leader of the House.
Wednesday 9 May saw the new parliament assemble for the election
of the Speaker. The Speaker of the previous parliament had been
George Thomas, a former Labour Cabinet minister, and he was the
unanimous choice to continue in that office. My respect for George
Thomas, already great, was to grow over the years. He was a deeply
committed Christian with a shining integrity that gave him as Speaker
a special kind of authority — but in my speech of congratulation,
something else was on my mind: I had to keep remembering not to
refer to Jim Callaghan as Prime Minister.
VISIT OF HELMUT SCHMIDT
On the following day Members of Parliament assembled-to take the
oath. But Thursday was a day of more than ceremonial importance
(indeed there was one ceremony which somehow got lost in the rush
— Denis’s birthday). It was on that day that Helmut Schmidt, the West
German Federal Chancellor, arrived in London on an official visit

originally arranged with the Labour Government — the first head of a
foreign government to visit me as Prime Minister.
There had been some discussion about whether this visit should go
ahead. But I was particularly keen that it should. I had met Herr
Schmidt in Opposition and had soon developed the highest regard for
him. He had a profound understanding of the international economy
on which — although he considered himself a socialist — we were to
find ourselves in close agreement. In fact, he understood a good deal
better than some British Conservatives the importance of financial
orthodoxy — the need to control the money supply and to restrain
public spending and borrowing so as to allow room for the private
sector to grow. But he had to be told straight away that although
Britain wanted to play a vigorous and influential role in the European
Community, we could not do so until the problem of our grossly unfair
budgetary contribution had been resolved.* I saw no reason to conceal
our views behind a diplomatic smokescreen; indeed I wanted to
convince Helmut Schmidt of both the reasonableness of our position
and the strength of our determination precisely because he and West
Germany exercised great influence in the Community. So I used every
occasion to get the message across.
The speech which I delivered that Thursday evening at our dinner in
honour of the Federal Chancellor was my first opportunity to set out
my new approach towards the European Community. I rejected right
from the start the idea that there was something ‘un-European’ in
demanding that inequities be sorted out. In a passage which caught
the media’s attention, I said:
It has been suggested by some people in this country that I and my
Government will be a ‘soft touch’ in the Community. In case such a rumour
may have reached your ears, Mr Chancellor, from little birds in Smith
Square, Belgrave Square, or anywhere else, it is only fair that I should advise
you frankly to dismiss it (as my colleagues did long ago!).* I intend to be
very discriminating in judging what are British interests and I shall be
resolute in defending them.

At our joint press conference the following day we were asked about
our personal relations, since Helmut Schmidt was a socialist who had
always referred to Mr Callaghan as ‘Jim’. When I stressed the
similarity of our policies, he intervened: ‘Don’t go too far, Prime
Minister, and do not spoil my relations with my own Party, please!’
WORKING WEEKEND
On Saturday I flew to Scotland to address the Scottish Conservative
Conference, something I always enjoyed. Life is not easy for Scottish
Tories; nor was it to become easier. Unlike English Conservatives, they
are used to being a minority party, with the Scottish media heavily
slanted against them. But these circumstances gave Scottish
Conservatives a degree of enthusiasm and a fighting spirit which I

admired, and which also guaranteed a warm-hearted and receptive
audience. Some leading Scottish Tories, though a small minority, still
hankered after a kind of devolved government, but the rest of us were
deeply suspicious of what that might mean to the future of the Union.
While reaffirming our decision to repeal Labour’s Scotland Act, I
indicated that we would initiate all-party talks ‘aimed at bringing
government closer to the people’. In the event we did so by rolling
back the state rather than by creating new institutions of government.
My main message to the conference, however, was a deliberately
sombre one, intended for Britain as a whole. That same day an
inflation figure of 10.1 per cent had been published. It would rise
further. I noted:
The evil of inflation is still with us. We are a long way from restoring honest
money and the Treasury forecast when we took over was that inflation was
on an upward trend. It will be some considerable time before our measures
take effect. We should not underestimate the enormity of the task which lies
ahead. But little can be achieved without sound money. It is the bedrock of
sound government.

As our economic and political difficulties accumulated in the months
ahead, no one could claim that they had not been warned.
We arrived back at RAF Northolt and drove to Chequers where I
spent my first weekend as Prime Minister. I do not think anyone has
stayed long at Chequers without falling in love with it. From the time
of its first prime ministerial occupant, David Lloyd George, it has been
assumed that the holders of that office would not necessarily have
their own country estates. For that reason, Lord Lee’s gift to the nation
of his country house for the use and relaxation of prime ministers
marks as much a new era as did the Reform Bills.
When I arrived as Prime Minister, the curator was Vera Thomas,
who knew and loved each perfectly polished piece of furniture, each
historic portrait, each glittering item of silver. Chequers itself is an
Elizabethan house, but has been substantially rebuilt over the years.
The centre of the house is the great hall, once a courtyard, enclosed at
the end of the last century, where in winter a log fire burns, giving a
slight tang of woodsmoke through every room.
Thanks to the generosity of Walter Annenberg, US Ambassador to
Britain from 1969–74, Chequers has a covered swimming pool. But in
the years I was there it was only used in the summer. Early on I
learned that it cost £5,000 a year to heat. By saving this money we
had more which could be spent on the perpetual round of necessary
repairs to the house. Perhaps the most important work I had done was
the cleaning of the Elizabethan panelling in the dining-room and the
Great Parlour. Once the layers of varnish and dirt had gone, we
discovered some beautiful marquetry beneath that had not been seen
for many years.

The group which gathered for Sunday lunch just ten days after our
election victory was fairly typical of a Chequers weekend. My family
were there, Denis, Carol, Mark. Keith Joseph, Geoffrey and Elspeth
Howe, the Pyms and Quintin Hailsham represented, as it were, the
Government team. Peter Thorneycroft and Alistair McAlpine were
present from Central Office — the latter having been, as Conservative
Party Treasurer, one of the most effective fund raisers of all time and
one of my closest and most loyal friends. David Wolfson, Bryan
Cartledge (my private secretary) with their wives, and our friends Sir
John and Lady Tilney completed the party.
We were still in a mood to celebrate our election victory. We were
away from the formality of No. 10. We had completed the initial task
of getting the Government on the road. We still had that spirit of
camaraderie which the inevitable disputes and disagreements of
government were bound to sap. The meal was a light-hearted and
convivial one. It was perhaps an instance of what a critic was later to
call ‘bourgeois triumphalism’.
But we were aware that there was a long road ahead. As my father
used to say:
It’s easy to be a starter, but are you a sticker too?
It’s easy enough to begin a job, it’s harder to see it through.

At 7 p.m. that evening Denis and I returned to London to begin my
second full week as Prime Minister. Work was already piling up, with
boxes coming to and from Chequers. I recall once hearing Harold
Macmillan tell an eager group of young MPs, none more eager than
Margaret Thatcher, that prime ministers (not having a department of
their own) have plenty of spare time for reading. He recommended
Disraeli and Trollope. I have sometimes wondered if he was joking.
The Privy Council is one of the oldest of Britain’s political institutions, with the most
important of the Crown’s advisers among its members, including by convention all
Cabinet ministers. Its meetings — usually of a few ministers in the presence of the
Queen — are now purely formal, but the oath taken by new members reinforces the
obligation of secrecy in conducting government business, and the issue of ‘Orders in
Council’ is still an important procedure for enacting the legislation not requiring the
approval of Parliament.
*

The Policy Unit was first set up by Harold Wilson in 1974 and continued by James
Callaghan. The value of the Unit, whose membership I subsequently increased, lies in
its flexibility and involvement in day-to-day policy matters, on the basis of close
collaboration with the Prime Minister.
*

*
*
*

Quasi-autonomous nongovernmental organization.
See Chapter 2, pp. 44–5.

Queen’s Speeches and Future Legislation Committee.

The 1922 Committee consists of all Conservative Members of Parliament (other than
those in office). At its meetings, and those of its sub-committees, views and policies are
discussed, and the results made known to ministers by the whips and PPSs. It is also
the 1922 Committee which has the decisive say in choosing the Speaker when the
Conservative Party is in office.
*

For the details and course of negotiations about Britain’s contribution to the
European Community budget, see Chapter 3.
*

No. 32 Smith Square is, of course, the home of Conservative Central Office and
Belgrave Square is the address of the German Ambassador’s residence.
*

CHAPTER II

Changing Signals
Domestic politics in the first six months — until the end of 1979

To turn from the euphoria of election victory to the problems of the
British economy was to confront the morning after the night before.
Inflation was speeding up; public sector pay was out of control; public
spending projections were rising as revenue projections fell; and our
domestic problems were aggravated by a rise in oil prices that was
driving the world into recession.
The temptation in these circumstances was to retreat to a defensive
redoubt, adopting a policy of false prudence: not to cut income tax
when revenues were already threatening to fall; not to remove price
controls when inflation was already accelerating; not to cut industrial
subsidies in the teeth of a rising recession; and not to constrain the
public sector when the private sector seemed too weak to create new
jobs. And, indeed, these adverse economic conditions did slow down
the rate at which we could hope to regenerate Britain. But I believed
that was all the more reason to redouble our efforts. We were running
up the ‘Down’ escalator, and we would have to run a great deal faster
if we were ever to get to the top.
THE FIRST QUEEN’S SPEECH
Our first opportunity to demonstrate to both friends and opponents
that we would not be deterred by the difficulties was the Queen’s
Speech. The first Loyal Address (as it is also called) of a new
government sets the tone for its whole term of office. If the
opportunity to set a radical new course is not taken, it will almost
certainly never recur. And the world realizes that underneath all the
brave new rhetoric, it is Business As Usual. I was determined to send
out a clear signal of change.
By the end of the debates on the Address it was evident that the
House of Commons could expect a heavy programme, designed to
reverse socialism, extend choice and widen property ownership. There
would be legislation to restrict the activities of Labour’s National
Enterprise Board and to begin the process of returning state-owned
businesses and assets to the private sector. We would give council
tenants the right to buy their homes at large discounts, with the
possibility of 100 per cent mortgages. There would be partial
deregulation of new private sector renting. (Decades of restrictive
controls had steadily reduced the opportunities for those who wished
to rent accommodation and thereby retarded labour mobility and

economic progress.) We would repeal Labour’s Community Land Act
— this attempt to nationalize the gains accruing from development
had created a shortage of land and pushed up prices. We removed the
obligation on local authorities to replace grammar schools and
announced the introduction of the Assisted Places Scheme, enabling
talented children from poorer backgrounds to go to private schools.
These were the first of what I hoped would be many steps to ensure
that children from families like my own had the chance of selfimprovement. We would, finally, curb what were often the corrupt
and wasteful activities of local government direct labour organizations
(usually socialist controlled).
When I spoke in the Queen’s Speech debate, two points attracted
particular attention: the abolition of price controls and the promise of
trade union reform. Most people expected that we would keep price
controls in some form, at least temporarily. After all, the regulation of
prices, wages and dividends had been one of the means by which,
throughout most of the western world, governments sought to extend
their powers and influence and to alleviate the inflationary effects of
their own financially irresponsible policies.
But there was plenty of evidence, gathered by the Confederation of
British Industry (CBI), that while price controls had a minimal effect
on inflation, they certainly damaged industrial profitability and
investment. One of our first discussions in ‘E’ Committee — the
economic strategy committee of the Cabinet, of which I was the
chairman — was whether we should press ahead with early and total
abolition of the Price Commission. Some ministers argued that with
inflation accelerating, the coming rise in prices would be blamed on
the Commission’s abolition and therefore on the government. This
argument had some force. But John Nott, the Trade Secretary, was
keen to act swiftly; and he was right. It would have been still more
difficult to abolish the Commission later in the year when prices were
already rising faster. Perhaps the first time our opponents truly
realized that the Government’s rhetorical commitment to the market
would be matched by practical action was the day we announced
abolition. We made public at the same time our decision to strengthen
the powers of the Director-General of Fair Trading and the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission to act against monopoly pricing, including
prices set by nationalized industries.
I was also keen to use my speech in the debate to put an
authoritative stamp on our trade union reforms. Jim Prior’s preferred
strategy was one of consultation with the trade unions before
introducing the limited reforms of trade union law which we had
proposed in Opposition. But it was vital to show that there would be
no back-tracking from the clear mandate we had received to make
fundamental changes. Initially, we proposed three reforms in the
Queen’s Speech. First, the right to picket — which had been so
seriously abused in the strikes of the previous winter and for many

years before — would be strictly limited to those in dispute with their
employer at their own place of work; thus secondary picketing would
become unlawful. Second, we were committed to changing the law on
the closed shop, under which employees had effectively been
compelled to join a union if they wished to obtain or keep a job, and
which at that time covered some five million workers. Those who lost
their jobs for this reason must in future be entitled to proper
compensation. Third, public funds would be made available to finance
postal ballots for union elections and other important union decisions:
we wanted to discourage votes by show of hands — the notorious ‘car
park’ votes — and the sharp practice, rigging and intimidation which
had become associated with ‘trade union democracy’.

In retrospect it seems extraordinary that such a relatively modest
programme was represented by most trade union leaders and the
Labour Party as an outright attack on trade unionism. In fact, we
would have to return — and soon — to the issue of trade union
reform. As time went by, it became increasingly clear to the trade
union leaders and to the Labour Party that not only did we have huge
public support for our policies, but that the majority of trade unionists
supported them too, because their families were being damaged by
strikes which many of them had not voted for and did not want. We
were the ones in touch with the popular mood.
This was my first major parliamentary performance as Prime
Minister, and I emerged unscathed. Nowadays, prime ministers make
relatively few speeches in the House. The most important are
speeches, like this, which deal with the government’s legislative
programme, speeches answering motions of censure, statements after
international summits and debates which arise at times of
international tension. This may be one reason why it is often difficult
— over and above the moral blow of losing an election and leaving
office — for prime ministers to revert to becoming Leaders of the
Opposition, a job which demands more speech-making, but with less
thorough briefing. Certainly, Jim Callaghan, who had never led his
party in opposition, looked uncomfortable in that role. It was no
surprise to me when he decided in October 1980 to step down from a
position which his own left wing was making increasingly intolerable
for him.
But it is Questions to the Prime Minister every Tuesday and
Thursday which are the real test of your authority in the House, your
standing with your party, your grip of policy and of the facts to justify
it. No head of government anywhere in the world has to face this sort
of regular pressure and many go to great lengths to avoid it; no head
of government, as I would sometimes remind those at summits, is as
accountable as the British prime minister.
I always briefed myself very carefully for Questions. One of the
private secretaries, my political secretary, my Parliamentary Private
Secretary and I would go through all the likely issues which might

come up without any notice. This is because the questions on the
Order Paper only ask about the prime minister’s official engagements
for that day. The real question is the supplementary whose subject
matter may vary from some local hospital to a great international issue
or to the crime statistics. Each department was, naturally, expected to
provide the facts and a possible reply on points which might arise. It
was a good test of the alertness and efficiency of the Cabinet minister
in charge of a department whether information arrived late — or
arrived at all; whether it was accurate or wrong, comprehensible or
riddled with jargon. On occasion the results, judged by these criteria,
were not altogether reassuring. However, little by little I came to feel
more confident about these noisy ritual confrontations, and as I did so
my performance became more effective. Sometimes I even enjoyed
them.
THE 1979 BUDGET
The next watershed in the Government’s programme was the budget.
Our general approach was well known. Firm control of the money
supply was necessary to bring down inflation. Cuts in public
expenditure and borrowing were needed to lift the burden on the
wealth-creating private sector. Lower income tax, combined with a
shift from taxation on earning to taxation on spending, would increase
incentives. However, these broad objectives would have to be pursued
against a rapidly worsening economic background at home and
abroad.
Britain’s rate of inflation was running at 10 per cent when we took
office, and rising. (The three-month rate was 13 per cent.) This
reflected the lack of financial discipline in Labour’s last years, when
they broke free of the constraints imposed on them by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1976. There was also a pay
explosion as powerful unionized groups rode roughshod over the
remains of Labour’s incomes policy. And internationally, oil prices had
begun to rise sharply, and were already about 30 per cent higher than
six months earlier, as a result of the continuing turmoil in Iran after
the fall of the Shah in 1978. This had an increasingly damaging effect
on the international economy.
The oil price rise increased worldwide inflationary pressures. But it
also had a perverse and, at least in the short term, damaging effect on
the domestic economy because sterling was a petro-currency and it
appreciated accordingly. Sterling was strong for other reasons too.
Following the election there had been a general increase in confidence
in the British economy. We were also pursuing a tight monetary
policy, requiring high interest rates (interest rates had to go up by two
percentage points at the time of the budget), and this attracted foreign
capital. As a result of all these factors, sterling continued to rise.

We were perhaps better prepared for taking the required economic
decisions than any previous Opposition. We had, every year,
conducted our own internal public expenditure exercises, seeking to
identify cuts wherever possible and putting figures on them. We had
also, through the ‘Stepping Stones’ group of Shadow ministers and
advisers of which John Hoskyns had been the main inspiration,
worked out how to combine our policies to achieve the overall
objective of reversing Britain’s economic decline.
But no amount of advance preparation could change the unpleasant
facts of finance or the budget arithmetic. The two crucial discussions
on the 1979 budget took place on 22 and 24 May between me and the
Chancellor. Geoffrey Howe was able to demonstrate that to reduce the
top rate of income tax to 60 per cent (from 83 per cent), the basic rate
to 30 per cent (from 33 per cent), and the PSBR to about £8 billion (a
figure we felt we could fund and afford) would require an increase in
the two rates of VAT of 8 per cent and 12.5 per cent to a unified rate
of 15 per cent. (The zero rate on food and other basics would be
unchanged.) I was naturally concerned that this large shift from direct
to indirect taxation would add about four percentage points onto the
Retail Price Index (RPI).
This would be a once and for all addition to prices (and so it would
not be ‘inflationary’ in the correct sense of the term which means a
continuing rise in prices). But it would also mean that the RPI, by
which people generally measured living standards and all too
frequently adjusted wage demands, would double in our first year of
office.* I was also concerned that too many of the proposed public
spending cuts involved higher charges for public services. These too
would have a similar effect on the RPI. I recalled at my first budget
meeting with Geoffrey that Rab Butler as Chancellor in 1951 had
introduced his tax cuts gradually. Should we do the same? Geoffrey
stuck to his guns. We went away to consider the question further.
At our second meeting we decided to go ahead. Income tax cuts
were vital, even if they had to be paid for by raising VAT in this large
leap. The decisive argument was that such a controversial increase in
indirect taxes could only be made at the beginning of a parliament,
when our mandate was fresh. If we waited, hoping that either
economic growth or cuts in public expenditure would do the job for
us, we might never achieve the structural shift needed to boost
incentives. We must establish the direction of our strategy from the
start and do it boldly. By the end of that second meeting the shape of
the budget which Geoffrey Howe announced on 12 June had
effectively been set.
It was generally agreed to be a dramatic reforming budget even by
those opposed to us, like the Guardian newspaper, which described it
as ‘the richest political and economic gamble in post-war
parliamentary history’. Its main provisions followed closely our
discussions at the end of May: a cut in the basic rate of income tax

from 33 to 30 per cent (with the highest rate cut from 83 to 60 per
cent), tax allowances increased by 9 per cent above the rate of
inflation, and the introduction of a new, unified rate of VAT at 15 per
cent.
Apart from the budget’s big income tax cuts, however, we were able
to reduce or remove controls on a number of areas of economic life.
Pay, price and dividend controls had gone. Industrial Development
Certificates, Office Development Permits and a range of circulars and
unnecessary planning controls were also removed or modified.
(Geoffrey Howe’s second budget in 1980 was to announce the creation
of Enterprise Zones, where businesses could benefit from tax breaks
and rate exemption to attract investment and promote employment in
run-down areas.)
But I took greatest personal pleasure in the removal of exchange
controls — that is the abolition of the elaborate statutory restrictions
on the amount of foreign exchange British citizens could acquire.
These had been introduced as an ‘emergency measure’ at the start of
the Second World War and maintained by successive governments,
largely in the hope of increasing industrial investment in Britain and
of resisting pressures on sterling. The overwhelming evidence was that
they no longer achieved either of the objectives previously expected of
them (if in fact they ever had done). With sterling buoyant and Britain
beginning to enjoy the economic benefits of North Sea oil, the time
had come to abolish them entirely. They were duly removed in three
stages — some at the time of the Budget, a few others later in July,
and the remainder in October (with the temporary exception of
controls relating to Rhodesia). The legislation itself stayed on the
Statute Book until 1987, but no further use was made of it. Not only
did the ending of exchange controls increase the freedom of
individuals and businesses; it encouraged foreign investment in Britain
and British investment abroad, which has subsequently provided a
valuable stream of income likely to continue long after North Sea oil
runs out.
But not every capitalist had my confidence in capitalism. I
remember a meeting in Opposition with City experts who were clearly
taken aback at my desire to free their market. ‘Steady on!’, I was told.
Clearly, a world without exchange controls in which markets rather
than governments determined the movement of capital left them
distinctly uneasy. They might have to take risks.
We had also been distracted throughout our budget discussions by
the worrying level of public sector pay rises. Here we had limited
freedom of manoeuvre. Hard, if distasteful, political calculations had
led us to commit ourselves during the election campaign to honour the
decisions of the Clegg Commission on those claims which had already
been formally referred to it. The issue was now whether to refer the
unsettled claims of other groups to Clegg, or to seek some new method
of dealing with the problem.

It was quite clear to me that in the longer run there were only two
criteria which could apply to pay in the public as in the private sector.
The first was affordability: ultimately, it was the taxpayer and
ratepayer who had to pay public sector wage bills, and if that burden
passed beyond a certain limit, the country’s economy would suffer.
The second was recruitment: pay had to be sufficient to attract and
retain people of the right ability and professional qualifications.
However, the whole bureaucratic apparatus designed to achieve
‘comparability’ between public and private sector pay — not just the
Clegg Commission but the Civil Service Pay Research Unit and other
bodies — obscured these simple criteria.
We decided to submit evidence to the Commission about the
necessity of keeping departmental budgets within reasonable limits
and what that meant for public sector pay. But we also decided to
keep the Commission in existence for the time being, and indeed refer
new claims to it on an ad hoc basis. We thought at the time that the
Commission might actually make lower pay awards than ministers
themselves might have had to concede. But that turned out to be a
highly optimistic assessment and, as a result, we underestimated the
public expenditure cost of Clegg.
In retrospect, we made a mistake. Even at the time, the warning
signs were evident. Geoffrey Howe told me that, allowing for some
success in buying out restrictive practices, average pay could well be
at least two to three percentage points higher than the recent June
Forecast had assumed. In the end, it was not until August 1980 that
we announced that Clegg would be abolished after its existing work
had been completed. Its last report was in March 1981. The fact
remains, however, that the momentum of public sector pay claims
created by inflation, powerful trade unions and an over-large public
sector was not going to be halted, let alone reversed, all at once.
CIVIL SERVICE REFORM
Whatever the short-term difficulties, I was determined at least to begin
work on long-term reforms of government itself. If we were to channel
more of the nation’s talent into wealth-creating private business, this
would inevitably mean reducing employment in the public sector.
Since the early 1960s, the public sector had grown steadily,
accounting for an increased proportion of the total workforce.* Unlike
the private sector, it actually tended to grow during recessions while
maintaining its size during periods of economic growth. In short, it
was shielded from the normal economic disciplines which affect the
outside world.
The size of the civil service reflected this. In 1961 the numbers in
the civil service had reached a post-war low of 640,000; by 1979 they
had grown to 732,000. This trend had to be reversed. Within days of

taking office, as I have noted, we imposed a freeze in recruitment to
help reduce the Government’s pay bill by some 3 per cent.
Departments came up with a range of ingenious reasons why this
principle should not apply to them. But one by one they were
overruled. By 13 May 1980 I was able to lay before the House our
long-term targets for reducing civil service numbers. The total had
already fallen to 705,000. We would seek to reduce it to around
630,000 over the next four years. Since some 80,000 left the civil
service by retirement or resignation every year, it seemed likely that
our target could be achieved without compulsory redundancies. We
were, in fact, able to do it.
But the corollary of this was that we should reward outstanding
ability within the civil service appropriately. The difficulties of
introducing pay rates related to merit proved immense; we made
progress, but it took several years and a great deal of pushing and
shoving.
Similarly, I took a close interest in senior appointments in the civil
service from the first, because they could affect the morale and
efficiency of whole departments. I was determined to change the
mentality exemplified in the early 1970s by a remark attributed to the
then head of the civil service, that the best that the British could hope
for was the ‘orderly management of decline’. The country and the civil
service itself were sold short by such attitudes. They also threatened a
waste of scarce talent.
I was enormously impressed by the ability and energy of the
members of my private office at No. 10. I usually held personal
interviews with the candidates for private secretary for my own office.
Those who came were some of the very brightest young men and
women in the civil service, ambitious and excited to be at the heart of
decision-making in government. I wanted to see people of the same
calibre, with lively minds and a commitment to good administration,
promoted to hold the senior posts in the departments. Indeed, during
my time in government, many of my former private secretaries went
on to head departments. In all these decisions, however, ability, drive
and enthusiasm were what mattered; political allegiance was not
something I took into account.
Over the years, finally, certain attitudes and work habits had crept
in that were an obstacle to good administration. I had to overcome, for
instance, the greater power of the civil service unions (which in
addition were increasingly politicized). The pursuit of new and more
efficient working practices — such as the application of information
technology — was being held up by union obstruction. In a
department like Health and Social Security where we needed to get
the figures quickly to pay out benefits, these practices were
disgraceful. But eventually we overcame them. There was even a
problem at the very top. Some Permanent Secretaries had come to
think of themselves mainly as policy advisers, forgetting that they

were also responsible for the efficient management of their
departments.
To see for myself, I decided to visit the main government
departments to meet as many people as possible and discuss how they
were tackling their priorities. I devoted most of a day to each
department. In September 1979, for instance, I had a useful discussion
with civil servants at the Department of Health and Social Security. I
brought up the urgent need to dispose of surplus land held by the
public sector. I was keen that where hospitals had land which they did
not need they should be able to sell it and retain the proceeds to spend
on improving patient care. There were arguments for and against this,
but one argument advanced on this occasion, which was all too
symptomatic of what had gone seriously wrong, was that this was
somehow unfair on those hospitals which did not have the good
fortune to have surplus land. We clearly had a long way to go before
all the resources of the Health Service would be used efficiently for the
benefit of patients. But this visit planted seeds that later grew into the
Griffiths* reforms of NHS management and, later still, the internal
market reforms of the Health Service in 1990.
Similarly, on 11 January the following year, I visited the Civil
Service Department (CSD). This was an enlightening, if not an
encouraging, experience. The CSD was set up in 1968, following
publication of the Fulton Committee Report, with responsibility for the
management and pay of the civil service. To the nucleus of the Pay
and Management Divisions of the Treasury were added the Civil
Service Commission and the newly established Civil Service College.
The CSD employed 5000 people, headed by Sir Ian Bancroft, the senior
Permanent Secretary. Although as Prime Minister I was in overall
charge of the civil service, the duties were exercised by a Minister of
State and the CSD had always lacked credibility and power in
Whitehall.
Not without cause. When I arrived at the CSD, many of my worst
fears about the civil service were confirmed. I met able and
conscientious people attempting to manage and monitor the activities
of civil servants in departments of which they knew little, in policy
areas of which they knew even less. Because the staff of other
departments were aware of the disadvantages under which the CSD
worked, they took scant notice of the recommendations they received
from it. After this visit, the only real question in my mind was whether
responsibility for the CSD’s work should be redistributed to the
Treasury or the Cabinet Office.
Inevitably, my visits to government departments were not as long as
I would have liked. There were other limits too on what I could learn
on these occasions — particularly that senior civil servants might feel
inhibited from speaking freely when their ministers were present.
Consequently, after discussing the matter with Sir Ian Bancroft and
having a word with Cabinet colleagues, I invited the Permanent

Secretaries to dinner at No. 10 on the evening of Tuesday 6 May 1980.
There were twenty-three Permanent Secretaries, Robin Ibbs (Head of
the CPRS), Clive Whitmore, my principal private secretary, David
Wolfson and myself around the dining-table.
This was one of the most dismal occasions of my entire time in
government. I enjoy frank and open discussion, even a clash of
temperaments and ideas, but such a menu of complaints and negative
attitudes as was served up that evening was enough to dull any
appetite I may have had for this kind of occasion in the future. The
dinner took place a few days before I announced the progamme of
civil service cuts to the Commons, and that was presumably the basis
for complaints that ministers had damaged civil service ‘morale’.
What lay still further behind this, I felt, was a desire for no change.
But the idea that the civil service could be insulated from a reforming
zeal that would transform Britain’s public and private institutions over
the next decade was a pipe-dream. I preferred disorderly resistance to
decline rather than comfortable accommodation to it. And I knew that
the more able of the younger generation of civil servants agreed with
me. So, to be fair, did a few of the Permanent Secretaries present that
night. They were as appalled as I was, and retreated into their shells. It
became clear to me that it was only by encouraging or appointing
individuals, rather than trying to change attitudes en bloc, that
progress would be made. And that was to be the method I employed. *
PUBLIC SPENDING
Such an approach, however, would take years. We were dealing with
crises on a weekly basis during the second half of 1979 as we scanned
the figures on public spending and borrowing, against the background
of an international economy slipping faster and faster into recession.
Our first task was to make whatever reductions we could for the
current financial year, 1979–80. Ordinarily, public spending decisions
were made by government during the summer and autumn of the
previous year and announced in November. Even though we were
several months into the current financial year, we had to begin by
reopening the public expenditure plans we had inherited from the
Labour Government. We would announce our new public expenditure
plans with the Budget. The scope for cuts was limited, partly because
of this, partly because of our own election pledges, and partly because
some changes we wanted to make required legislation.
We had promised to increase resources for defence and law and
order, and not to cut spending on the National Health Service. We
were also pledged to raise retirement pensions and other long-term
social security benefits in line with prices — and to honour Labour’s
promised pension increases that year. We might have taken cash from
the contingency reserve, but if there was to be any cash to take we
would have to resist extra claims by government departments — no

easy matter. Another possible device would be to squeeze the volume
of public expenditure by holding to the existing cash limits, even
though inflation had risen since they were set by the previous
government. But that in turn would mean holding the line on public
sector pay — again, no easy matter. Receipts from privatization might
help us to balance the books. But although government-owned shares
in British Petroleum could be sold at once, the sale of state-owned
assets on a really large scale would need legislation. Much of the work
on public expenditure cuts which we had done in Opposition had been
overtaken by events, the most damaging of which was the generosity
of Professor Clegg. In short, we seemed to be boxed in.
But I was determined that we should make as vigorous a start as
possible. I felt that the Treasury’s first proposals for cuts in the current
financial year, 1979–80, did not go far enough. Indeed, I had a
meeting less than a fortnight after entering No. 10 with Treasury
officials at which I told them so very firmly. Accordingly, John Biffen
brought forward revised proposals that cut a further £500 million off
the total, and I made it clear to colleagues that that was the least we
could do.
In the end we were able to announce £3.5 billion of economies
along with Geoffrey’s Budget. In addition to the measures we were
originally considering, we sought savings on industrial support,
particularly regional development grants, on energy and on holding
back projected spending on development land and public investment.
We also decided to raise prescription charges, which had remained
at the same level for eight years during which time prices had risen
two and a half times. (The wide range of exemptions would be
maintained.) This had not been our first choice for savings from the
DHSS budget. We had originally discussed extending the number of socalled ‘waiting days’ which must lapse before an applicant is entitled
to sickness or unemployment benefit from three to six days. We
decided not to press ahead with this, but nevertheless the idea found
its way into the press in one of the leaks that were continually to
bedevil our discussions of public spending.
No sooner had we agreed savings for the current year, 1979–80,
than the still more difficult task was upon us of planning public
expenditure for 1980–81 and subsequent years. In July 1979, when
the crucial decisions were being hammered out, we had a series of
particularly testing (and testy) Cabinet discussions on the issue. Our
goal was what it had been in Opposition, that is to bring public
expenditure back to the 1977–8 level in real terms. We hoped to
achieve this by 1982–3. But, in spite of the reductions we had made,
public expenditure was already threatening to run out of control. That
in turn would have serious consequences for the PSBR, and thus for
interest rates, in the longer term for taxation, and ultimately for our
entire programme.

Nonetheless — or perhaps for that very reason — there was strong
opposition from some ministers to the cuts. These were the so-called
‘wets’ who over the next few years took their opposition to our
economic strategy to the very brink of resignation.* Some argued that
the strategy had been overtaken by events; and indeed for those who
had not heard that Keynes was dead, the prospect of reducing
expenditure and curbing borrowing as we and the world sank into
recession was undoubtedly alarming. Others put up a hundred and one
reasons why any particular cut was out of the question. Defence, for
instance, would not be able to achieve its sacrosanct target of 3 per
cent growth a year. Or the DES would not be able to make economies
in the time available (in spite of declining pupil numbers.) Or the
Department of Employment would have to find money in response to
the mounting jobless total. In the light of this opposition, I instructed a
small group of key ministers to discuss with departments the proposals
for reductions and report back to Cabinet.
Geoffrey Howe was superbly stolid in resisting this pressure. Later in
July he set out for colleagues the precise implications of a failure to
agree the £6.5 billion reductions he was proposing. He also dispelled
some of the misunderstandings. Ministers had to recognize that we
were not cutting to the bone, but merely reining in the increases
planned by Labour and compensating for other increases that the
deepening recession had made almost inevitable.
Labour’s previously announced plans would have increased
expenditure in 1979–80 by some 2 to 3 per cent over the level of
1978–9, and in 1980–81 by some 5 per cent, on the transparently
erroneous assumption that the economy would grow by between 2 per
cent and 3 per cent a year. Not that Labour was unique in this. The
Treasury used to produce a fascinating chart, the so-called ‘porcupine’,
in which the forecasts of economic growth in successive public
spending white papers shot ever upwards, looking a little like
porcupine quills, while the actual course of economic growth
stubbornly remained on an only gently rising gradient. This was a
literally graphic illustration of the overoptimistic assumptions on
which past public expenditures plans had been based year after year. I
was determined not to add another set of spikes.
In this case, Labour’s plans would have involved expenditure of a
further £5 billion in 1980–81 to be financed out of growth that was
not happening. Moreover, this overshoot had been aggravated by a
rate of pay increase in the public sector which was forecast to be 18
per cent, and which which would cost another £4.5 billion. To offset
these increasing obligations we had to find substantial cuts. We had to
make reductions of £6.5 billion in the expenditure plans for 1980–81,
just to hold the PSBR in that year down to £9 billion. That figure was
in itself too high. But the ‘wets’ continued to oppose the cuts both in
Cabinet and in the indecent obscurity of leaks to the Guardian.

It was not until the end of July that the Cabinet brought itself to
take the necessary decisions. The conclusions were extensively leaked.
Even so, we decided the wisest course was to wait for the autumn
before publishing the full figures in the Autumn Statement. We had
made some tough decisions in those first three months. It was,
however, only a start.
Over the summer the economic situation worsened. On my return
from my first Commonwealth summit in Lusaka in August, Geoffrey
Howe presented me with a general survey of the economy which he
rightly described as ‘not very cheerful’. Unemployment was likely to
begin to rise as the international recession deepened. Inflation was
accelerating. Our competitiveness had worsened as a high pound and
high wage costs put industry under increasing pressure. We became
increasingly worried about the implications of pay rises for
unemployment and bankruptcies. I asked that we should collect and
circulate examples of excessive pay awards, which priced goods out of
the market and destroyed jobs.
In September we again returned to public spending. We not only
had to publish the conclusions we had agreed in July, but also our
plans for the years up to 1983–4. And that meant more economies. We
decided on a renewed drive to cut waste and reduce civil service
numbers. We also agreed sharp increases in the price of electricity and
gas (which had been artificially held down by Labour) that would
come into effect in October 1980. Electricity would rise by 5 per cent,
and gas by 10 per cent, over and above inflation.
The 1980–81 Public Expenditure white paper was duly published on
1 November. These public spending plans honoured our pledges to
provide more resources for defence, law and order and social security
(reflecting the year’s record pensions uprating). They would also hold
the public spending total for 1980–81 at the same level as 1979–80. In
spite of the fact that this reduction of some £3.5 billion from Labour’s
plans was denounced as draconian, it really was not large enough.
That was evident not only to me, but also to the financial markets,
already concerned about excess monetary growth.
Here, too, we seemed to be running up the ‘Down’ escalator. On 5
November Geoffrey Howe came to see me. The money supply figures
were well above target, principally because the PSBR and bank
lending were both higher than expected. The PSBR had been affected
by one strike which held up payment of telephone bills and by another
which had disrupted VAT payments. Companies were borrowing to
finance wage settlements they could not afford. Interest rates overseas
were on the way up. And the public spending figures had also, as I
suspected, proved too high for the markets. A financial crisis
threatened. In the days of Denis Healey this would have elicited a
fiscal package or ‘mini-budget’. We had no hesitation in rejecting this
approach. Higher interest rates or lower public spending, not tinkering
with fiscal demand management, were the appropriate response.

On 15 November we accordingly raised Minimum Lending Rate
(MLR — the successor to Bank Rate) to 17 per cent. (Measured by the
RPI, inflation at this time was running at 17.4 per cent.) Other
measures to help fund the PSBR were also announced.

Of course, the Opposition had a field day, attacking our whole
strategy as misguided and incompetent. The fact of the matter was not
that our strategy was wrong but that we had yet to apply it sufficiently
rigorously and get a grip on public spending and borrowing. That in
turn was increasing the pressure on the private sector through higher
interest rates. Keith Joseph had warned of this in Opposition in his
Stockton Lecture in 1976, which was later published as a pamphlet
under the title Monetarism is not Enough, in which he said:
Though, it is true, there is always talk of cutting public expenditure, it has
remained almost entirely talk. Cutting public expenditure has come to mean
juggling with figures … But whereas cuts in public expenditure rarely
eventuate, squeezes on the private sector are ‘for real’. The interest rate is
increased, bank lending is contracted, taxes are raised, other old-fashioned
deflationary measures are used. The private sector is punished for the state
sector’s profligacy.

I knew that we had to break this vicious spiral. We had to make
further attempts to curb public spending and borrowing — no matter
how difficult — because otherwise private enterprise would have to
bear a crushing burden of public sector profligacy. Geoffrey and I
accordingly decided that we had no alternative but to seek further
spending reductions in 1980–81 and in subsequent years. He brought
forward a paper, first to me and a small group of ministers and then to
the full Cabinet, proposing an extra £i billion reduction in 1980 — 81,
and £2 billion in each of the following years. From what I had seen of
departmental ministers’ fierce defence of their own budgets, I knew
that this would provoke trouble. But I also knew that the great
majority in the Party were determined to see the strategy succeed. So I
sought to take my case to them.
I had already told the Party Conference in Blackpool on 12 October:
It is your tax which pays for public spending. The government have no
money of their own. There is only taxpayers’ money.

Just before the November rise in interest rates, I had used the
platform of the Lord Mayor’s Banquet to reaffirm that we would hold
to our monetary policy in the fight against inflation:
We shall take whatever action is necessary to contain the growth of the
money supply. This government, unlike so many of its predecessors, will face
up to economic realities.

I now made it clear that we would return to the attack on excessive
public spending. The Party Leader’s speeches to the 1922 Committee
are an opportunity to appeal directly for support for the Government’s
policies. On Thursday 13 December, I told the ‘22 that we needed to

‘have another go at getting expenditure down’ and was well received.
A little less than a month later, I agreed to be interviewed by Brian
Waiden on Weekend World and said of public spending that ‘if we got a
billion off, I would be quite pleased’. The atmosphere quickly became
more propitious for a renewed drive against overspending.
In Cabinet on 24 January 1980 we returned to a discussion of public
expenditure for 1980–81 and the years to 1983–4. Higher oil prices,
almost no growth projected in industrialized countries in the coming
year, and the steel strike* adding to the PSBR, formed a sombre
background to our deliberations. I knew that these next two years
would be crucial. We had to take the required action on inflation and
public spending in that time: then as growth resumed, we would again
be in a position to move towards lower taxes and lower interest rates.
But the ‘wets’ launched a fierce attack on our policy and the theory
underlying it. It was argued, for instance, that the PSBR should be
allowed to rise during a recession. Our response was that it was a very
different matter when the PSBR started out by being far too high —
the legacy of a Labour Government which had doubled the national
debt during its period in office. Individual ministers defended their
bailiwicks. Jim Prior argued persuasively for a continuation of the
special employment measures.* We agreed but decided that we would
have to take another look at the the burgeoning social security budget.
A week later, Cabinet resumed its discussion — and focused closely
on social security.* Both for public spending reasons and in order to
deal with the ‘Why Work?’ problem (namely, the disincentive to work
created by the small disparity between in-work and out-of-work
incomes), we had already agreed to tax short-term social benefits as
soon as possible. In the interim we decided to reduce these benefits —
unemployment, sickness, injury, maternity and invalidity benefits —
by 5 per cent. The so-called earnings related supplement (payable with
certain short-term benefits) would be reduced from January 1981, and
abolished in January 1982. We also decided to introduce legislation to
deal with the vexed question of supplementary benefit for strikers’
families. This was not only expensive to provide; it shifted the balance
of power in industrial disputes against employers and responsible
union leaders. In future, assessments would assume that £12 a week
was provided either from the striker’s own resources, or from union
strike pay. We finally agreed a number of disparate savings on
housing, on expenditure by the Property Services Agency, and from a
rise in prescription charges to £1.
When Geoffrey Howe delivered his second budget on 26 March
1980,* he was able to announce that we had found over £900 million
in further savings in 1980–81 (though part of that was absorbed by an
increase in the contingency reserve). Overall, at current prices this was
over £5 billion less than Labour had planned to spend. In the
circumstances, it was a formidable achievement, but also a fragile one.
As the economy sank deeper into recession, there would be fresh

demands, some of them difficult to resist, for higher public spending
on programmes like social security and the loss-making nationalized
industries. In a paper he wrote for me in June 1979, John Hoskyns
had used a memorable phrase about governments ‘trying to pitch
[their] tent in the middle of a landslide’. As we moved into the 1980–
81 public expenditure round and the forecasts worsened, I could hear
the canvas strain and the ground rumble.
IRISH TERRORIST OUTRAGES
The second half of 1979, though dominated by economic policy and
by the intense round of diplomatic activity,* was also a time darkened
by terrorism. Barely a fortnight after entering No. 10 I had delivered
the address at the Memorial Service for Airey Neave.* Not long
afterwards, IRA terrorists struck another blow which shocked people
around the world.
I was at Chequers for the Bank Holiday Monday of 27 August when I
learnt of the shocking murder of Lord Mountbatten and, that same
day, of eighteen British soldiers. Lord Mountbatten was killed by an
explosion on board his boat off the coast at Mullaghmore, County
Sligo. Three other members of his party were killed and three injured.
In an even greater defiance of civilized custom, the murder of our
soldiers was even more contemptible. Eighteen were killed and five
injured in a double explosion triggered by remote controlled devices at
Narrow Water, Warrenpoint, near Newry, close to the border with the
Republic. The IRA had exploded the first bomb and then waited for
those who came by helicopter to rescue their comrades before
detonating the second. Among those murdered by the second bomb
was the Commanding Officer of the Queen’s Own Highlanders.
Words are always inadequate to condemn this kind of outrage: I
decided immediately that I must go to Northern Ireland to show the
army, police and civilians that I understood the scale of the tragedy
and to demonstrate our determination to resist terrorism. Having
returned to London from Chequers, I stayed there on Tuesday to allow
those involved to deal with the immediate aftermath while I held two
meetings with colleagues to discuss the security requirements of the
province. That evening I wrote personally to the families of the
soldiers who had died; such letters are not easy to write. There were,
alas, to be many more of them during my time in office.
I flew to Ulster on Wednesday morning. For security reasons, the
visit was given no prior publicity. I went first to the Musgrave Park
Hospital in Belfast and talked to the injured soldiers, then visited the
Lord Mayor of Belfast at City Hall. I had insisted that I must meet the
ordinary citizens of the city, and since the best way to do so was to
walk through Belfast’s shopping centre, that is where I went next. I
shall never forget the reception I received. It is peculiarly moving to

receive good wishes from people who are suffering. One never knows
quite how to respond. But I formed then an impression I have never
had reason to revise, that the people of Ulster will never bow to
violence.
After a buffet lunch with soldiers of all ranks from 3 Brigade, I
received a briefing from the army and then departed by helicopter to
what is rightly referred to as the ‘bandit country’ of South Armagh.
Dressed in a camouflage jacket worn by a female soldier of the Ulster
Defence Regiment (a ‘Greenfinch’), I saw the bomb-battered
Crossmaglen RUC station — the most attacked RUC-Army post in the
Province — before running back to the helicopter. It is too dangerous
for either security force personnel or helicopters to remain stationary
in these parts.
My final visit was to Gough barracks, the RUC base in Armagh,
followed by a return flight to the mainland at six that evening. It is
difficult to convey the courage of the security forces whose job it is to
protect the lives of us all from terrorism. In particular, members of the
UDR, who do their military duty living in the community where they
and their families are always vulnerable, show a quiet, matter-of-fact
heroism which I have never ceased to admire.
Back in London, we continued our urgent discussions on security.
There were two major questions. How were we to improve the
direction and co-ordination of our security operations in the province?
And how were we to get more co-operation in security matters from
the Irish Republic? On the first, we decided that the difficulties of
coordinating intelligence gathered by the RUC and the army would be
best overcome by instituting a new high-level security directorate. On
the second, we agreed that I would tackle the Irish Prime Minister,
Jack Lynch, when he arrived shortly for Lord Mountbatten’s funeral.
Accordingly, we arranged a day’s talks with Mr Lynch and his
ministerial colleagues at No. 10 on the afternoon of Wednesday 5
September. The first session was a tête-à-tête between the two prime
ministers; then at 4 p.m. we were joined by our respective ministers
and officials.
Mr Lynch had no positive suggestions of his own to make at all.
When I stressed the importance of extradition of terrorists from the
Republic, he said that the Irish constitution made it very difficult. Mr
Lynch pointed out that under Irish law terrorists could be tried in the
Republic for offences committed in the UK. So I asked that RUC
officers — who would have to amass the evidence for such
prosecutions — be able to attend interrogations of terrorist suspects in
the south. He said they would ‘study’ it. I knew what that meant:
nothing doing. I asked that we extend the existing arrangements by
which our helicopters could overfly the border across which terrorists
seemed able to come and go almost at will. He said they would study
that as well. I sought more effective liaison both between the RUC and
the Garda, and between the British and Irish armies. Same response.

At one point I got so exasperated that I asked whether the Irish
Government was willing to do anything at all. They agreed to a further
meeting between ministers and officials, but there was a fatal absence
of the political will to take tough measures. I was disappointed,
though not altogether surprised. However, I was determined to keep
up the pressure on the Republic. I could not forget that by the time of
my visit to Northern Ireland 1,152 civilians and 543 members of the
security forces had been killed as a result of terrorist action.
We also lost no opportunity to use the revulsion the killings
provoked in the US to inform public opinion there about the realities
of life in Ulster. The emotions and loyalties of millions of decent IrishAmericans are manipulated by Irish Republican extremists, who have
been able to give a romantic respectability to terrorism that its sordid
reality belies. As a result, there has been a continuing flow of funds
and arms which helps the IRA to continue its campaign, whereas in
1979 we were faced with the absurd situation that the purchase of
3,000 revolvers for the RUC was held up by a state department review
under pressure from the Irish Republican lobby in Congress.
I visited the province again on Christmas Eve. This time I met
members of the Northern Ireland prison service as well as the security
forces. For the prison officers, too, faced grave danger and worked
often in appalling conditions. From March 1978 they had been dealing
with the consequences of the so-called ‘dirty protest’* by over 350
terrorist prisoners, seeking ‘special category status’ and privileges.
Seventeen prison officers had been murdered in the past four years,
seven of them in the previous three months. It made the troubles of a
political life seem very trivial.
In order to try to give a better indication of the real effect of government policies on
living standards, we published from 17 August 1979 a new ‘Tax and Price Index’ (TPI)
which combined, in one figure, a measure both of the tax changes and the movements
in retail prices. For those dependent on earned income, who constituted the bulk of the
population, this provided a better indicator of changes in total household costs than
the RPI. However, for the purposes of wage bargaining, the circumstances of an
individual enterprise should determine what could be afforded.
*

The proportion of the British workforce employed in the public sector crept
inexorably upwards from 24 per cent in 1961 to reach almost 30 per cent by the time
we came into office. By 1990 through privatization and other measures we had
brought it down again to a level below that of 1961.
*

The Griffiths Report of 1983 was the basis for the introduction of general
management in the NHS, without which the later reforms would not have been
practicable. See pp. 606–17.
*

It was only towards the end of my time in government that we embarked upon the
radical reforms of the civil service which were contained in the ‘Next Steps’
programme. Under this programme much of the administrative — as opposed to
policy-making — work of government departments is being transferred to agencies,
staffed by civil servants and headed by chief executives appointed by open
competition. The agencies operate within frameworks set by the departments, but are
free of detailed departmental control. The quality of management within the public
service promises to be significantly improved.
*

‘Wet’ is a public schoolboy term meaning ‘feeble’ or ‘timid’, as in ‘he is so wet you
could shoot snipe off him.’ The opponents of government economic policy in the early
*

1980s were termed ‘wets’ by their opponents because they were judged to be shrinking
from stern and difficult action. As often happens with pejorative political labels (cf.
Tory, which originally referred to Irish political bandits), ‘wet’ was embraced by the
opponents of our economic strategy, who in turn named its supporters ‘the dries’.
*

For the steel strike, see Chapter 4, pp. 108–14.

These were a whole series of measures which we had inherited from the previous
Labour Government and modified in various ways. They included the Youth
Opportunities Programme, measures to encourage training, job release schemes, help
for small firms and compensation for those in temporary, short-time work.
*

Patrick Jenkin had already announced in June 1979 that we would end the statutory
obligation to uprate long-term benefits in line with prices or earnings, whichever was
higher: henceforth, uprating would be in line with prices.
*

*
*
*

For the measures in the 1980 budget see Chapter 4, pp. 95–7.

For the summits I attended and the visits that I made in this period, see Chapter 3.
See Volume II.

For the outcome of these protests and our response to the hunger strikes, see Chapter
14.
*

CHAPTER III

Into the Whirlwind
Foreign affairs during the first eighteen months in 1979–1980

BRITAIN AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
I had made a number of political visits abroad before I became Prime
Minister, travelling on various occasions to the Soviet Union, the
United States, Germany, Israel and Australia. I enjoyed these tours —
as long as there was plenty to read, interesting people to meet and we
were doing useful work. But it is certainly a very different experience
going abroad as Prime Minister, accompanied everywhere by a highly
professional team of advisers, on what is usually a hectic schedule, and
meeting heads of government on equal terms.
Familiarizing myself with this new role was not made easier by the
fact that within weeks of coming into office I had to face the problem
of Britain’s excessive contribution to the European Community (EC)
budget — something which required tough bargaining from a difficult
position, and the use of diplomatic tactics which many people thought
less than diplomatic. Nor was our budget contribution the only source
of contention within the EC, even in those early days. It became
increasingly clear to me that there were real differences of vision
about Europe’s future.
Shortly after I took office the first direct elections to the European
Parliament were held. (In those days the Parliament was formally
known as ‘the European Assembly’, which perhaps gives a more
accurate impression of its limited role.) In the course of the campaign I
made a speech in which I emphasized my vision of the Community as
a force for freedom:
We believe in a free Europe, not in a standardized Europe. Diminish that
variety within the member states, and you impoverish the whole Community
…

I went on:
We insist that the institutions of the European Community are managed so
that they increase the liberty of the individual throughout the continent.
These institutions must not be permitted to dwindle into bureaucracy.
Whenever they fail to enlarge freedom the institutions should be criticized
and the balance restored.

There has, however, always been a contrary tendency in the
Community — interventionist, protectionist, and ultimately federalist.
The sharpness of the contrast between these two views of Europe
would only become fully apparent as the years went by. But it was
never far beneath the surface of events and I was always aware of it.

I was also very much aware of another feature of the EC, which had
been apparent from its earliest days, continued to shape its
development and diminished Britain’s capacity to influence events —
namely, the close relationship between France and Germany. Although
this relationship may have seemed to depend on personal rapport —
between President Giscard and Chancellor Schmidt or President
Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl — the truth is that it was explicable
more in terms of history and perceptions of long-term interest. France
has long feared the power of Germany and has hoped that by superior
Gallic intelligence power can be directed in ways favourable to French
interests. Germany, for her part, knows that although she has
contributed considerably more to the EC financially and economically
than any other state, she has received an enormous return in the form
of international respectability and influence. The Franco-German axis
would remain a factor to be reckoned with, and I shall have more to
say about it later.
THE STRASBOURG EUROPEAN COUNCIL
My first European Council took place in Strasbourg on 21 and 22 June
1979. France hosted the talks. Strasbourg had been chosen as the
venue in acknowledgement of the new importance of the European
Parliament (which holds two-thirds of its sessions there) following the
elections, in which Conservatives had won 60 of the 78 British seats.
I was confident that Chancellor Schmidt had taken away from our
earlier discussions a clear impression of my determination to fight for
large reductions in Britain’s net budget contribution. I was hoping he
would pass the message on to President Giscard, who was to chair the
summit; both men were former Finance ministers and should be well
able to understand Britain’s point of view. (I could not help noticing
too that they spoke to one another in English: but I was too tactful to
remark on it.)
The background to the British budget problem is quickly described,
though the precise details were extremely complicated. At the time of
the negotiations for Britain’s accession we had received an assurance
(as I would continue to remind other member states) that:
should an unacceptable situation arise within the present Community or an
enlarged Community, the very survival of the Community would demand
that the [Community] Institutions find equitable solutions, [my italics]

The reason why such an assurance had been necessary was that
Britain’s unique trading pattern made her a very large net contributor
to the EC budget — so large that the situation was indeed
unacceptable. We traditionally imported far more from non-EC
countries than did other Community members, particularly of
foodstuffs. This meant that we paid more into the Community budget
in the form of tariffs than they did. By contrast, the Community

budget itself is heavily biased towards supporting farmers through the
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP): indeed when we came into office
more than 70 per cent of the budget was spent in this way. The CAP
was — and is — operated in a wasteful manner. The dumping of these
surpluses outside the EC distorts the world market in foodstuffs and
threatens the survival of free trade between the major economies. The
British economy is less dependent on agriculture than that of most
other Community countries and our farms are generally larger and
more efficient than those of France and Germany; consequently we
receive less in subsidy than they do. Britain traditionally received a
fairer share of the receipts of the Community’s non-agricultural
programmes (such as the regional and social funds), but the growth of
these programmes had been limited by the power of the farming lobby
in Europe and by the international recession.
The previous Labour government had made a great play of
‘renegotiating’ the terms of Britain’s original entry. In 1975 a Financial
Mechanism to limit our contribution had been worked out in principle:
but it had never been triggered, and never would be, unless the
originally agreed conditions were changed. As a result, there was no
solid agreement to which we could hold our Community partners.
One other development had worsened the overall position: Britain’s
prosperity, relative to that of our European neighbours, had steadily
declined. In spite of North Sea oil, by 1979 Britain had become one of
the least prosperous members of the Community, with only the
seventh highest GDP per head of population among the member states.
Yet we were expected shortly to become the largest net contributor.
So from the first my policy was to seek to limit the damage and
distortions caused by the CAP and to bring financial realities to bear
on Community spending. But at the Council meeting in Strasbourg I
also had two short-term objectives. First, I wanted to have the budget
question raised now and to gain acceptance of the need for action,
though without at this stage going into too much detail. Second, I
wanted to secure a firm undertaking from other heads of government
that at the next Council meeting in Dublin the Commission would
bring forward proposals to deal with the problem.
I sought at the start to strengthen our ‘European credentials’. We
Conservatives were welcomed in Strasbourg because we were seen as
more pro-European than Labour: I tried to emphasize this by
indicating that although we were not then in a position to join the
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System
(EMS), we were ‘minded’ — an expression used so as not to offend the
House of Commons to which it had not yet been announced — to swap
some of our own reserves in the Bank of England for ecus (the
European Currency Unit). I knew that Chancellor Schmidt was keen
that we should commit sterling to the ERM; but I already had doubts
about the wisdom of this course, which subsequently were reinforced.
In any case, as it happened, my announcement of our intentions as

regards the ecu ‘swap’ did not receive much visible welcome from the
others: like other such concessions to the ésprit communautaire, it
appeared simply to be pocketed and then forgotten.
If the budget issue was to concentrate minds as I wished, it had to
be raised on the first day, because the communiqué is always drafted
by officials overnight, ready for discussion the following morning. The
draftsmen would therefore have to receive their instructions before the
end of the first day. This did not prove easy. Over lunch I spoke to
President Giscard about what I wanted and gained a strong impression
that we would be able to deal with the budget early on. The whole
group of us then set out to walk to the Hôtel de Ville through
Strasbourg’s narrow and attractive streets. The bonhomie seemed
tangible.
But when we resumed, it quickly became clear that President
Giscard was intent on following his previous agenda, whatever he had
given me to understand. At least I was well briefed and took an active
part in the discussion about energy and the world economy. I pointed
out that Britain had not flinched from the hard decisions required to
ride out these difficulties and that we were making large cuts in public
spending. By twenty minutes to seven that evening, we had decided, if
we could, to hold Community imports of oil between 1980 and 1985
at a level no higher than that of 1978. We had agreed to stress the
importance of nuclear energy. We had committed ourselves to keep up
the struggle against inflation. Inevitably, I suppose, we had agreed to
say something about ‘convergence’ between the economic performance
of member states (a classic piece of Euro-jargon). In fact, we had done
almost everything except what I most wanted us to do — tackle the
budget issue.
Fortunately, I had been warned what might happen next. President
Giscard proposed that as time was getting on and we needed to get
ready for dinner, the matter of the budget should be discussed the
following day. Did the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom not
agree? And so at my very first European Council I had to say ‘no’. As it
turned out the lateness of the hour probably worked in my favour:
conclusions are often easier to reach when time presses and minds are
turning to the prospect of French haute cuisine and grands crus. I spelt
out the facts: and the facts were undoubtedly telling. It was agreed to
include in the communiqué an instruction to the Commission to
prepare proposals for the next Council to deal with the matter. So, a
little late, we rose for dinner. Argument always gives one an appetite.
At these gatherings, the custom was that heads of government and
the President of the Commission dine together; foreign ministers
formed a separate group. It was also customary to discuss foreign
affairs. The plight of the Vietnamese ‘boat people’ was one topic
which, of course, directly concerned Britain. Another was Rhodesia. It
is interesting also to note that even then we were discussing the
perennial problem of the Japanese trade balance.

Strasbourg had one solid result: it had put the question of Britain’s
unfair budget contribution squarely on the agenda. I felt that I had
made an impression as someone who meant business, and afterwards I
learned that this feeling was correct. It was at Strasbourg, too, that I
overheard a foreign government official make a stray remark that
pleased me as much as any I can remember: ‘Britain is back,’ he said.
THE TOKYO G7 SUMMIT
Many of the wider issues discussed at Strasbourg were raised again
shortly afterwards in the still grander surroundings of the economic
summit of the seven principal western industrial powers in Tokyo (the
Group of Seven, or G7 for short). As soon as I had finished my report
to the House of Commons on the Strasbourg Council, we drove out to
Heathrow for the long flight to Japan. I knew that oil prices and their
effect on the economy would again be top of the agenda. I was well
briefed. Denis’s knowledge of the oil industry was at my disposal and I
had also had a thorough briefing by oil experts over lunch at
Chequers. They knew the oil business inside out; by contrast, I was to
find at Tokyo that politicians who thought they could limit oil
consumption by setting out plans and targets had little practical
understanding of the market.
I took the opportunity to discuss some other, equally important,
matters en route to Tokyo. We had sought and were given permission
from the Soviet Union to shorten the route to Japan by overflying
Russia. In Moscow the plane landed to refuel and I was met by the
Soviet Prime Minister, Alexei Kosygin, who broke off a meeting of
communist prime ministers to come to the airport. To my surprise, an
unscheduled dinner was laid out in the airport lounge. Hospitality in
the Soviet Union was always generous for important visitors: there
were two worlds, one for foreign dignitaries and the party élite, with
luxuries of all kinds, and another for the ordinary people, with only
the plainest of goods, and not many of them.
The motive for the Soviets’ special attention was soon clear. They
wanted to know more about the ‘Iron Lady’ — as their official news
agency, Tass, had christened me following a speech I made in 1976
while Leader of the Opposition.
In East-West relations this was the lull before a huge political storm.
Under the guise of détente the Soviets and their communist surrogates
had pursued for some years a policy of covert aggression, while the
West had let slip its defences. At Tokyo I was to find further evidence
of the Carter Administration’s overconfidence in the goodwill of the
Soviet Union. The second Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II)
had been signed only days before. There was even talk of a SALT III.
But the mood was about to change, for the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan was less than six months away.

Although we discussed defence, the most sensitive matter I raised
with Mr Kosygin was the plight of the ‘boat people’, who were leaving
Vietnam in their hundreds of thousands. They were the victims of
appalling persecution, terrible enough to make them sell all their
belongings, leave their homes and risk their lives sailing in
overcrowded and dangerous ships, with no certainty of escape. A large
merchant fleet sailed under the British flag and naturally our ships
were picking up these tragic refugees from communism to save them
from the risk of shipwreck and piracy. The rule of the sea is that
survivors from shipwreck can be landed at the next port of call. But it
often happened that the next port of call — in Singapore, Malaysia or
Taiwan — refused to take them unless we agreed that they should be
allowed to come on to Britain. At home we were still experiencing all
the social and economic pressures of past mass immigration and
consequently this was something we were most reluctant to agree. At
Taiwan, although they would be given medical attention and food on
the ship, they were not being allowed to land. The boat people
themselves refused to land in Canton: they had had enough of
communism. So this meant that Hong Kong became their favoured
immediate destination, from where they hoped to go on to the United
States or elsewhere in the West. The communists, of course, knew
perfectly well that this flood of emigration was a costly embarrassment
to the West and doubtless they hoped it might destabilize other
countries in the region.
I put it to Mr Kosygin that Vietnam was a communist country and a
close ally of the Soviet Union, and that he had considerable influence
there. What was happening was a disgrace not only to the regime in
Vietnam, but to communism as a whole. Could he do nothing to stop
it? His words were translated to me: ‘W-e-ll’, he said (or the Russian
equivalent), ‘they are all drug-takers or criminals …’ He got no
further. ‘What?’, I asked. ‘One million of them? Is communism so bad
that a million have to take drugs or steal to live?’ He immediately
dropped the subject. But the point had been made and fully
understood, as the nervous looks on the faces of his staff — and indeed
some of mine — indicated. I could not stop the stream of persecuted
refugees but I could and would always challenge the lies with which
the communists sought to justify their persecution. After an hour and
forty minutes we returned to the plane and resumed the flight to
Tokyo. Later I referred the matter to the United Nations — it was too
big for any one country to tackle.
The round of international summits makes a prime minister’s life
nowadays very different from what it was in the time of Anthony
Eden, Harold Macmillan or Alec Douglas-Home. While in Opposition I
had been sceptical of the value of much of this activity. In government
I still worried that summits took up too much time and energy,
particularly when there was so much to do at home: within a few
months of taking office I had been to Strasbourg to represent Britain in

Community matters, I was at Tokyo to represent her in the wider
economic forum, and I would soon be going to Lusaka for the meeting
of the Commonwealth heads of government.
The G7 had its roots in international action to counter the economic
crisis of the mid-1970s. The first meeting was held in 1975 at
Rambouillet in France. Since then the numbers attending and the
formality of proceedings have increased year by year, and the result
has not been an improvement. The principal advantages and
disadvantages were well summed up by Chancellor Schmidt. The G7
summits had, he believed, helped the West to avoid what he called
‘beggar my neighbour’ policies — the competitive devaluations and
protectionism which had inflicted such economic and political harm
during the 1930s. On the other hand, he thought that too often the
summits had been tempted to enter into undertakings which could not
be kept; I agreed. There was always pressure, to which some
governments were all too ready to bend, to come up with forms of
words and ambitious commitments which everyone could accept and
no one took seriously.
However, the soaring price of oil gave the 1979 Tokyo economic
summit more than usual significance. Indeed, the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC, the cartel of major oil
producers) was meeting at the same time as the G7, its principal
customers.* While we were in Tokyo the price of a barrel of Saudi oil
rose from $14.54 to $18, with many OPEC crudes going higher still.
Consequently, all the talk was of how to limit western dependency on
oil and of deceptively specific targets to be met by particular dates.
But I knew that the main way of reducing consumption was to allow
the price mechanism to do its job. The danger, if we did not, was that
countries would seek to accommodate higher oil prices by printing
money, leading to inflation, in the hope of staving off recession and
unemployment. We had seen in Britain that inflation was a cause of
unemployment rather than an alternative to it, but not everyone had
learned that lesson.
The previous summit had been held in Bonn in 1978 when the
doctrine of ‘fine tuning demand’ had still been fashionable. Germany
had then been expected to act, as the jargon had it, as the ‘locomotive’
for growth, pulling the world out of recession. As Chancellor Schmidt
was to tell the summit leaders at Tokyo, the main result had been to
put up German inflation: he would not go down that path again. At
Bonn there had been no new heads of government present and the old
nostrums prevailed. At Tokyo, by contrast, there were three
newcomers — the Japanese Prime Minister and Conference Chairman,
Mr Ohira, the new Prime Minister of Canada, Joe Clark, and myself.
Apart from me, the strongest advocates of free market economics were
Helmut Schmidt and, to an even greater extent, Count Otto von
Lambsdorff, his Finance minister.

On leaving the plane at Tokyo airport, I stepped into a huge crowd
of reporters (some two thousand reporters attended these summits
then, and more now). They had turned out to see that extraordinary,
almost unprecedented, phenomenon — a woman prime minister. The
weather was extremely hot and humid. There was very tight security. I
was glad when we arrived at the hotel where the great majority of
foreign delegates, with the exception of the President of the United
States, were staying. Soon after my arrival, I went to see President
Carter at the United States Embassy where we talked over our
approach to the issues which would arise, especially energy
consumption, which posed a particular problem — and one with
important political implications — for the US. Mrs Carter and Amy
joined us at the end of the meeting. In spite of press criticism, the
Carters obviously enjoyed having their daughter travelling with them
— and why not, I thought.
It was impossible not to like Jimmy Carter. He was a deeply
committed Christian and a man of obvious sincerity. He was also a
man of marked intellectual ability with a grasp, rare among
politicians, of science and the scientific method. But he had come into
office as the beneficiary of Watergate rather than because he had
persuaded Americans of the Tightness of his analysis of the world
around them.
And, indeed, that analysis was badly flawed. He had an unsure
handle on economics and was therefore inclined to drift into a futile
ad hoc interventionism when problems arose. His windfall profits tax
and controls on energy prices, for instance, only transformed the
OPEC-induced price rises, which they were intended to cure, into
unpopular queues at filling stations. In foreign affairs, he was overinfluenced by the doctrines then gaining ground in the Democratic
Party that the threat from communism had been exaggerated and that
US intervention in support of right-wing dictators was almost as
culpable. Hence he found himself surprised and embarrassed by such
events as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and Iran’s seizure of
American diplomats as hostages. And in general he had no large vision
of America’s future so that, in the face of adversity, he was reduced to
preaching the austere doctrine of limits to growth that was
unpalatable, even alien, to the American imagination.
In addition to these political flaws, he was in some ways personally
ill-suited to the presidency, agonizing over big decisions and too
concerned with detail. Finally, he violated Napoleon’s rule that
generals should be lucky. His presidency was dogged with bad luck
from OPEC to Afghanistan. What it served to demonstrate, however,
was that in leading a great nation decency and assiduousness are not
enough. Having said which, I repeat that I liked Jimmy Carter; he was
a good friend to me and to Britain; and if he had come to power in the
different circumstances of the post-Cold War world, his talents might
have been more apposite.

That evening the European members of the summit met together for
dinner, hosted by President Giscard. The Community had, of course,
already agreed its own approach to energy at Strasbourg. The main
issue now was how this would fit in with that which the three non-EC
governments at the G7 wished to pursue.
The following morning, after the inevitable photographs, the first
session began in the Conference Room on the second floor of the
Akasaka Palace. Delegations sat around an oblong table and were
arranged in alphabetical order: it was always useful that this placed us
next to the United States. The precise arrangements for the arrival of
the leaders reflected formal considerations of precedence, heads of
state arriving after heads of government, and the order in each
category determined by length of time in office. Precedence meant
most to the French and least to the Americans: in fact, neither Jimmy
Carter nor Ronald Reagan took much notice of it at all. As the rest of
us sat there we would speculate as to who would manage to arrive
last.
The meeting began, as usual, with a short general speech by each
head of government. Chancellor Schmidt spoke before me in the first
session, and after me in the second. We found ourselves stressing
exactly the same points — the importance of the battle against
inflation and the crucial role of the price mechanism in limiting
energy consumption. My interventions appeared to be well received —
not least by the Germans, as Count Lambsdorff subsequently told us. It
was perhaps the nearest we ever came to an Anglo-German entente. I
noted that many of our present difficulties stemmed from the pursuit
of Keynesian policies with their emphasis on the deficit financing of
public expenditure and I stressed the need to control the money supply
in order to defeat inflation. There followed, after Mr Ohira and
Chancellor Schmidt had taken a similar line, an extraordinary
intervention by President Giscard in which he mounted a spirited
defence of Lord Keynes and clearly rejected the basic free market
approach as unnecessarily deflationary. Sig. Andreotti — Italy’s Prime
Minister then and again in my last days as Prime Minister — endorsed
the French view. It was a revealing expression of the fundamental
philosophical differences which divide the Community.
It was also revealing about the personalities of President Giscard
and Prime Minister Andreotti. President Giscard d’Estaing was never
someone to whom I warmed. I had the strong impression that the
feeling was mutual. This was more surprising than it seems, for I have
a soft spot for French charm and, after all, President Giscard was seen
as a man of the Right. But he was a difficult interlocutor, speaking in
paragraphs of perfectly crafted prose which seemed to brook no
interruption. Moreover, his politics were very different from mine:
though he had the manners of an aristocrat, he had the mind-set of a
technocrat. He saw politics as an élite sport to be carried on for the
benefit of the people but not really with their participation. There

might be something to be said for this if technocrats really were cool
intellectual guardians above the passions and interests of the rest of
us. But President Giscard was as likely as anyone to be swept away by
intellectual and political fashion; he simply expressed his passions
coldly.
Prime Minister Andreotti was no more on my wavelength than the
French President. Even more than the latter, this apparently
indispensable participant in Italian governments represented an
approach to politics which I could not share. He seemed to have a
positive aversion to principle, even a conviction that a man of
principle was doomed to be a figure of fun. He saw politics as an
eighteenth-century general saw war: a vast and elaborate set of parade
ground manoeuvres by armies that would never actually engage in
conflict but instead declare victory, surrender or compromise as their
apparent strength dictated in order to collaborate on the real business
of sharing the spoils. A talent for striking political deals rather than a
conviction of political truths might be required by Italy’s system and it
was certainly regarded as de rigueur in the Community, but I could not
help but find something distasteful about those who practised it.
For all their hospitality, it would be difficult to claim too much for
the quality of Japan’s chairmanship of the proceedings. At one stage I
intervened to clarify for the sake of the officials — the ‘sherpas’ as
they are known — precisely which of the two alternative draft
communiqués we were discussing. While we were entertained that
evening at a banquet given by the Emperor of Japan, the sherpas
began their work. At about two o’clock in the morning, still in my
evening dress, I went to see how the communiqué drafters were
getting on with their work. I found them refining their earlier draft in
the light of our discussions and setting out alternative forms of words
where decisions would be required from the summit the following day.
I hoped we would be as businesslike as they evidently were.
The following day we met once again at the Akasaka Palace to go
through the communiqué, always a tedious and lengthy process. There
was some disagreement between the Americans and the Europeans
about the base year from which to set our different targets for the
reduction of oil imports. But for me perhaps the most revealing
discussion concerned the Japanese target. Until almost the last
moment it was far from clear whether Mr Ohira’s advisers would allow
him to give a figure at all. Since I was quite convinced that the market
itself would achieve the necessary limitation of oil consumption,
regardless of what we announced, it all seemed rather academic to me.
When in the end the Japanese did announce their figures no one had
any idea what sort of reduction they constituted, if any; but President
Carter warmly congratulated them all the same.
And so the communiqué was issued and the customary press
conference held. The most important decision made had nothing to do
with checking oil consumption. It was that, despite the inclinations of

several G7 governments, we were not going to fall into the trap of
trying to achieve a co-ordinated reflation of demand. It was a useful
signal for the future.
From Tokyo I flew to Canberra, arriving the following morning. This
was my third visit to Australia, though it was to be only a brief one.
There was time to see my daughter, Carol, who was working as a
journalist there, but my main purpose was to talk to Malcolm Fraser,
the Australian Prime Minister. I briefed him on what had taken place
at Tokyo. But even more important, we discussed the forthcoming
Commonwealth Conference in Lusaka at which Rhodesia would
inevitably be the main issue. Over the next eight months, Rhodesia
was to take up a great deal of my time.
THE RHODESIAN SETTLEMENT
Rhodesia had been a long-standing source of grief to successive British
governments, and an acute problem since Ian Smith’s Unilateral
Declaration of Independence in 1965. It had caused particular
difficulties for the Conservative Party, a large section of which
believed that the economic sanctions imposed against the illegal
regime were futile and damaging and insisted on voting against them
when they came up for annual renewal. Both the Conservative and
Labour front benches had long been committed to seek a settlement on
the basis of the so-called ‘six principles’ whose fundamental purpose
was to lay down the conditions for a transition to black majority rule,
while upholding the rights of the white minority and ensuring true
democracy, the rule of law and an end to discrimination. But this
degree of common ground between the leaders of both parties was not
necessarily shared by their supporters.
The elections of April 1979 in Rhodesia fundamentally changed the
whole position. Under the new constitution, worked out under the
‘internal settlement’ with Ian Smith, Bishop Muzorewa was elected as
head of a black majority government, in a 64 per cent turn-out of a
black majority electorate. The ‘Patriotic Front’ parties — the guerillas
of Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo — had not, of course, taken part
in the elections. Viscount Boyd of Merton — a former Conservative
Colonial Secretary — had attended as an observer and reported back
to me, as Leader of the Opposition, that the elections had been fairly
conducted. It was generally considered that all of the six principles
had now been fulfilled and there was wide expectation that we would
recognize the new government when we took office.
However, I was well aware that what the people of Rhodesia needed
above all was peace and stability. It was the war, relentlessly carried
on by the guerillas, which had forced the white minority government
to make concessions: that war had to be ended. To bring peace we had
either to win international acceptance for the new regime or bring
about the changes which would win such acceptance.

The first and most immediate problem was the attitude of the
neighbouring ‘front line’ African states. They must, if at all possible, be
won over. We sent Lord Harlech, another former Conservative minister
and an ex-Ambassador to Washington, for talks with the Presidents of
Zambia, Tanzania, Botswana, Malawi and Angola. He also went to
Mozambique and Nigeria. I was not at all keen at this stage that he
should even talk to the leaders of the Patriotic Front, Mr Mugabe and
Mr Nkomo: their forces had carried out atrocities which disgusted
everyone and I was as keen to avoid dealings with terrorists abroad as
I would be at home. However, unpleasant realities had to be faced.
Peter Carrington’s view was that it was essential to secure the widest
possible recognition for a Rhodesian regime, since that country held
the key to the whole South African region. He turned out to be right.
Accordingly, Lord Harlech did see the Patriotic Front leaders as well
as Bishop Muzorewa and others. His mission at least made clear how
large were the obstacles to achieving an end to the war. In July the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) endorsed the Patriotic Front as
the sole legitimate authentic representative of the people of
Zimbabwe. Nigeria, with which Britain had important economic ties,
was bitterly hostile to the Muzorewa Government. Black African states
insisted on viewing Bishop Muzorewa’s Government as nothing more
than a façade for continued white minority rule. The fact that this
greatly underrated the change which the internal settlement had
effected did nothing to reduce the consequences of their attitude for
Rhodesia.
Although we did not intend to continue the joint Anglo-American
approach pursued by Labour, which had got nowhere, the attitude of
the United States was of vital importance. President Carter was under
strong political pressure from US black and liberal opinion. The
Administration would soon have to say whether Bishop Muzorewa’s
Government met the conditions set by Congress, without which
recognition and the lifting of sanctions by the US would not be
possible. It was likely that the conclusion would be that it did not
meet those conditions.
Yet the situation did offer opportunities, if we were able to grasp
them. First, nearly everyone considered that it was Britain’s
responsibility to solve the problem, and even though this frequently
made us the object of criticism it also gave us a relatively free hand if
we knew how to use it. Second, there was a great weariness among the
parties involved and not just the Rhodesians themselves. The
surrounding African states were finding it costly, disruptive and
dangerous to play host to the two guerilla armies, themselves the
target of the well-trained and effective Rhodesian army. Nkomo’s
forces in Zambia were said to outnumber Zambia’s own army. There
was a real desire for a settlement. But how to reach it?
Our best chance of a breakthrough was likely to be at the
forthcoming Commonwealth Conference in Lusaka. This would be the

first regular Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting held in
Africa. Zambia adjoined the Rhodesian war zone. It was also landlocked, so that the Queen, who is traditionally present during the first
days as Head of the Commonwealth (though she does not open or
attend the meeting) could not use the Royal Yacht Britannia. There
were, accordingly, some worries about Her Majesty’s safety, on which
it was my responsibility to advise. My feeling was that there was no
reason why her visit should not go ahead, and I gave that advice
shortly before the start of the Queen’s African tour, from which she
went on direct to Lusaka where she received an enormous welcome. I,
by contrast, was far from being their favourite person, when, late in
the evening of Monday 30 July, I arrived in Lusaka to face, without
prior notice, a hostile and demanding press conference.
We had put the long flight out to good use, working through the
precise approach we should take. I had a first-class team of advisers,
and, of course, a first-class Foreign Secretary — with whom I had a
lively exchange when he suggested that our mission was really a
‘damage limitation exercise’, at that time (as I told him) a phrase I had
never even heard. I said that I wanted to do better than that; and
between us in the end we managed to do so.
Our strategy was to take full responsibility ourselves for reaching a
settlement. The task in Lusaka was to persuade the Commonwealth
leaders to accept this, and to acknowledge that the Rhodesian problem
was not the responsibility of the Commonwealth as a whole. To obtain
that result we had to make it clear that Britain would be ready to
resume authority in Rhodesia and to hold fresh elections. We knew
also that there would have to be significant changes to the present
constitution of Rhodesia if, after elections, the new government was to
receive international recognition and acceptance. Those changes could
only be brought about by some kind of Constitutional Conference
bringing together all sides. The decision whether or not to hold such a
conference would very much depend on how matters went at Lusaka.
My arrival in Zambia coincided with an announcement by the
Nigerian Government that it was nationalizing BP’s Nigerian oil assets.
This was not a good start, but I went on to have an extremely useful
day of talks with other heads of government before the conference
officially began on the Tuesday. There was, in fact, a high turn out: 27
heads of government were present and all 39 full Commonwealth
members were represented. Our host was President Kenneth Kaunda.
At the closed session, the opening speech — one of the best of the
conference — was given by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore
who reviewed international political developments. But much serious
business was done ‘in the margins’, as the diplomatic jargon has it, of
the larger meetings. For example, the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka
asked me whether a substantial sum of British overseas aid was still
available for the construction of the massive Victoria Dam in his
country. I confirmed it on a postcard — undoubtedly one of the most

expensive I have ever written.
However, it was the situation in Rhodesia which had to be the real
priority. In my opening public statement at the conference on the
Wednesday I said that we would ‘listen with the greatest attention to
what is said at this meeting in Lusaka’. But on Friday, at the
conference’s closed session to discuss Rhodesia, I was able to be much
more specific. I said that everyone should recognize just how much
had changed as a result of Bishop Muzorewa’s election even though
‘there are those who seem to believe that the world should simply go
on treating [him] as if he were Mr Smith.’ I drew attention to the
extensive international consultations we had undertaken to identify a
solution. I acknowledged that from these we had learned the strength
of the view ‘that the constitution under which Bishop Muzorewa has
come to power is defective in certain important respects’, in particular
the provisions whereby the white minority could block all unwelcome
constitutional change. We had also observed that those consulted
criticized the composition and powers of the various service
commissions, and I noted ‘it is clearly wrong that the Government of
[Rhodesia/Zimbabwe] should not have adequate control over certain
senior appointments.’ We had been told that it was essential that the
the Patriotic Front should be able to return and take a full part in
politics. Finally, we had been impressed by the general conviction that
any solution must derive its authority from Britain as the responsible
colonial power.
I summed up our intentions:
The British Government are wholly committed to genuine black majority
rule in Rhodesia … We accept that our objective must be to establish …
independence on the basis of a constitution comparable with the
constitutions we have agreed with other countries … We will therefore
present our proposals as quickly as possible to all the parties, and at the
same time call on them to cease hostilities and move forward with us to a
settlement.

It had been agreed to hold back the debate on southern Africa until
the Friday so that after it the heads of government could go straight to
their customary informal weekend retreat for private discussions on
Rhodesia’s future. My task was to win the support of the key figures
there. A small group was set up consisting of myself and Peter
Carrington, Mr (now Sir) Sonny Ramphal, Secretary-General of the
Commonwealth, President Kaunda of Zambia, President Nyerere of
Tanzania, Messrs Fraser and Manley, the Prime Ministers of Australia
and Jamaica and Mr Adefope, the representative of Nigeria. Sir
Anthony Duff, who was part of my team, drafted the heads of
agreement. It all went remarkably smoothly until the very end. Our
meeting ended successfully at Sunday lunch time and the full version
of the agreement was to have been discussed and endorsed by the full
conference on Monday morning. However, on Sunday afternoon
Malcolm Fraser chose to brief the Australian press. This required some

rapid and unconventional action.
That evening we all attended a Commonwealth service in Lusaka
Cathedral, where we had the benefit of a long polemical sermon from
the Archbishop. I had been told already that the press knew the
substance of what had been decided. Sonny Ramphal and I were
sitting together; he was to read the first lesson, and I the second. After
he had read his I showed him a note I had received from Peter
Carrington about Malcolm Fraser’s intervention, suggesting that we
must now brief the British press on what had taken place, subject to
the Secretary-General’s approval. On the back of my hymn sheet,
while I was reading the second lesson, Mr Ramphal wrote an
alternative suggestion. The heads of government had been invited to a
barbecue that evening at Malcolm Fraser’s conference villa: we could
hold a meeting there and settle a communiqué to be issued at once.
This seemed to me an excellent idea. I agreed to telephone Kenneth
Kaunda immediately after the service to warn him of what we had in
mind. And so the meeting came about. It took an hour and there were
some very pointed comments. I was none too pleased with Malcolm
Fraser myself. But the conclusion was satisfactory. Indeed, most of us
were relieved that it had all been so amicable and that our
proceedings could therefore end a day early.
I returned home on Wednesday morning. I was well pleased with
what had been achieved, so much of it by Peter Carrington and Tony
Duff. Many had believed that we could not come out of Lusaka with an
agreement on the lines we wanted. We had proved them wrong. We
had incidentally proved the Zambian press wrong too: they had so
convinced themselves beforehand of the truth of their own
propaganda about me that it was clearly a shock to find that they were
dealing with a real person rather than a colonial cardboard cut-out. I
had no illusions about the scale of the task ahead: it was never going
to be easy to steer Rhodesia to independence, legitimacy and stability.
But after Lusaka I believed that it could be done, and that we had won
the African good will to carry it through successfully.
Britain accordingly called a Constitutional Conference for the
interested parties at Lancaster House in London in September. Its
purpose was emphasized as being not just to talk but to reach a
settlement. Peter Carrington arranged the agenda to take the most
difficult questions last, so that the first item to be agreed was the new
constitution; only then would come the question of the transitional
arrangements; and finally the calling of a cease-fire. We calculated
that the longer the conference continued, the less any of the interested
parties would be willing to take responsibility for breaking it up. We
reserved to ourselves the task of putting forward final proposals in
each phase and we required the parties to respond, even if these
proposals did not meet all their objectives. At each stage we had to
exert pressure — direct and indirect — on the two sides to reach a
satisfactory compromise. Peter Carrington chaired the conference with

great skill and took charge of its day-to-day work. My role lay outside
it. The heads of the ‘front line’ states came to London in person or sent
in High Commissioners to see me for a progress report. President
Machel of Mozambique was especially helpful in putting pressure on
Robert Mugabe. I also gave dinner for President Nyerere, another
strong backer of Mr Mugabe. His concern was how to blend the three
separate armies — the two guerilla armies and the Rhodesian army —
into one, a task which in fact would fall to the British army to achieve.
The Lancaster House proposals could not have got through without the
support of the Presidents of the ‘front line’ states and, indeed, many
other Commonwealth countries.
Just after the conference concluded, all three rival leaders — Bishop
Muzorewa, Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo — came to see me
together at No. 10. We talked upstairs in my study. They were in
contemplative mood, pondering the future. I had the clear impression
that each of them expected to win. Perhaps that was just as well.
Probably the most sensitive aspect of our approach related to the
transitional arrangements: it was clear to me that, both for
constitutional and practical reasons, Britain must resume direct
authority in Rhodesia until the elections were over, though for as short
a period as possible. On 15 November a bill was introduced to provide
for the appointment of a Governor and for sanctions to be removed as
soon as he arrived in Rhodesia. Christopher Soames accepted the post.
The decision to send him, as Governor, to Salisbury on 12 December,
even before the Patriotic Front had accepted the cease-fire proposals,
certainly involved some risk and was much criticized at the time. But
we were clear that the momentum had to be maintained. Moreover,
Christopher was an ideal appointment: not only did he have the
authority of a Cabinet minister and wide diplomatic experience, he
and his wife, Mary, had precisely the right style to carry off this most
delicate and demanding job. Heavy pressure from the US and the
‘front line’ states finally led the Patriotic Front to accept the proposals
for the cease-fire on 17 December, and the agreement was finally
initialled on 21 December. I telephoned the Soameses in Salisbury on
Christmas Day to wish them the season’s greetings and ask how things
were. The reply was that in spite of several severe breaches of the
cease-fire and some clear intimidation by the supporters of Mr
Mugabe, the situation looked increasingly hopeful.
The outcome of the elections is well known. Mr Mugabe’s party, to
most people’s surprise, won an overwhelming victory. On 18 April
Rhodesia, as the Republic of Zimbabwe, finally received its
independence.
It was sad that Rhodesia/Zimbabwe finished up with a Marxist
government in a continent where there were too many Marxists
malad-ministering their countries’ resources. But political and military
realities were all too evidently on the side of the guerilla leaders. A
government like that of Bishop Muzorewa, without international

recognition, could never have brought to the people of Rhodesia the
peace that they wanted and needed above all else. From the British
point of view the settlement also had large benefits. With the
Rhodesian question finally solved, we again played an effective role in
dealing with other Commonwealth — and especially African — issues,
including the pressing problem of the future of Namibia and the
longer-term challenge of bringing peaceful change to South Africa.
Britain had demonstrated her ability, by a combination of honest
dealing and forceful diplomacy, to settle one of the most intractable
disputes arising from her colonial past.
THE EC BUDGET AGREEMENT OF 1980
With the Lancaster House Conference still in progress, I had to turn my
mind once again to the vexed question of how to negotiate a
substantial reduction in Britain’s net contribution to the European
Community budget. Figures had at long last been put on the size of
that contribution and henceforth it was difficult for anyone to deny
the scale of the problem. Also the European Commission had produced
a report which indicated that it was indeed possible, in line with wellestablished Community principles, to achieve a ‘broad balance’
between British contributions and receipts. There were, therefore,
some grounds for optimism, but I had no illusion that a settlement
would be easy and I was well aware of the possibility of sharp
practice. British officials had indicated to those of the presidency my
concern at the procedural wrangles which had characterized the
previous Strasbourg Council and my desire that the presidency should
take a firm line and get the budget discussed early.
By this time, the member states of the Community knew that we
were serious. On 18 October I delivered in Luxemburg the 1979
Winston Churchill Memorial Lecture, which, as the occasion required,
dealt principally with foreign affairs.
I warned:
I must be absolutely clear about this. Britain cannot accept the present
situation on the Budget. It is demonstrably unjust. It is politically
indefensible: I cannot play Sister Bountiful to the Community while my own
electorate are being asked to forego improvements in the fields of health,
education, welfare and the rest.

We had also taken every opportunity to seek wider understanding of
the merits of our case. I had talks in Bonn with Helmut Schmidt at the
end of October, and on 19 and 20 November there was a two-day
Anglo-French summit in London. The Germans and the French knew
that I meant business.
In the run up to the Dublin Council, we examined carefully the
measures available to us to bring pressure on the Community.
Christopher Soames, who had great experience of the ways and wiles

of the Europeans, sent me a note to the effect that the Community had
never been renowned for taking unpleasant decisions without long
wrangling and that I should not worry too much about the cards in my
hand because a major country like Britain could disrupt the
Community very effectively if it chose. I noted his advice. In this
spirit, we had examined quite early on — though we looked at it again
later — the possibility of withholding British payments to the
Community. For practical and legal reasons this always seemed a nonstarter. Nevertheless, I believed that even the possibility caused
satisfactory anxiety in the Commission, whose pressure to get a
satisfactory settlement was vital. We also had the lever of refusing to
agree agricultural price increases, which the French and German
Governments — each facing elections — wanted to see. Our moral
position was strengthened, too, by the fact that the French had broken
the EC law by obstructing British lamb imports: the European Court of
Justice found against them on 25 September — though morality
counts for little in the Community.
At the next Council — in Dublin at the end of November, the Irish
having now assumed the European Community Presidency — the issue
of our budget contribution dominated the business. The obvious
security risk from the IRA required that I be lodged overnight in
splendid isolation in Dublin Castle, the former seat of British rule. The
Irish press enjoyed the idea that I slept in the bed used by Queen
Victoria in 1897, though I had the advantage over her of a portable
shower in my room. Indeed, I was very well looked after. The
hospitality was perhaps the best feature of the visit, and contrasted
strongly with the atmosphere at the meetings which was extremely
and increasingly hostile. I had expected something of the sort. I went
to Dublin with a newly tailored suit. Ordinarily I would have enjoyed
wearing something new on an occasion as important as this, but I
thought twice: I didn’t want to risk tainting it with unhappy memories.
This was not, though, the only wise decision I made at Dublin: the
principal one was to say very clearly, and with at least as much force
as at Strasbourg, the word ‘no’.
The Council opened amicably enough in Phoenix Park at the Irish
President’s official residence where he hosted lunch. Back in the
Council at Dublin Castle we got down to business. My opening speech
set out the facts of our case in somewhat greater detail than at
Strasbourg and I elaborated on them in the vigorous debate which
followed. There was a good deal of argument about the figures, at the
root of which was an obscure and complex issue — how to calculate
the losses and gains resulting to individual states from the operation of
the CAP. But which ever way one did the sums, there was no doubt
that the UK was making a huge net contribution, and unless it was
mitigated it was about to become the biggest. We were not arguing
that we should be net beneficiaries (though some in Britain would
have wished me to); in fact, we were only asking for a ‘broad balance’.

It was unacceptable that at a time when we were making cuts in
public spending at home we should be expected to make a net
contribution of more than £1 billion a year. I emphasized Britain’s
commitment to the Community and our wish to avoid a crisis, but I
left no one in any doubt that this is precisely what the Community
would face if the problem were not resolved.
We had put forward our own proposals on the budget. But the
Commission had come up with some of its own and I was prepared to
accept their basic approach as a starting point. First, they proposed
that action be taken to shift the weight of Community expenditure
generally away from agriculture towards structural and investment
programmes. The trouble was that this would take too long — if it
happened at all. Second, they proposed, in addition, specific spending
on UK projects to boost our receipts. But there simply were not enough
suitable projects. Finally, on the contribution side, the 1975 Correction
Mechanism had so far failed to cut our payments. If it were reformed
on the lines the Commission was proposing, it could help reduce our
net contributions — but still not by enough: we would still be
contributing about the same as Germany and much more than France.
Something far more radical would be required.
I made one other point which was to prove of some significance. I
said that, ‘the arrangement [must] last as long as the problem.’ It
seemed to me then, and even more so by the end of the Council, that
we simply could not have these battles every year, all to establish
what common sense and equity ought to have made self-evident from
the beginning.
It quickly became clear that I was not going to make the other heads
of government see matters like this. Some, for example the Dutch
Prime Minister, Mr Andries Van Agt, were reasonable, but most were
not. I had the strong feeling that they had decided to test whether I
was able and willing to stand up to them. It was quite shameless: they
were determined to keep as much of our money as they could. By the
time the Council broke up Britain had been offered a refund of only
£350 million, implying a net contribution of some £650 million. That
refund was just not big enough and I was not going to accept it. I had
agreed that there should be another Council to discuss the matter
further, but I was not overoptimistic after what I had seen and heard
in Dublin. For me it went much further than hard bargaining about
money, which was inevitable. What I would not accept was the
attitude that fairness as such did not seem to enter into the equation at
all. I was completely sincere when I had said that Britain was asking
no more than its due; and my anger when such a proposition was
regarded with cynical indifference was equally genuine.
It was while reflecting on the quintessentially un-English outlook
displayed by the Community at this time and later that I came across
the following lines from Kipling’s ‘Norman and Saxon’ in my old,
battered collection of my favourite poet’s verse. The Norman baron

with large estates is warning his son about our English forefathers, the
Anglo-Saxons, and says:
The Saxon is not like us Normans. His manners are not so polite.

But he never means anything serious till he talks about justice and right.

When he stands like an ox in the furrow with his sullen set eyes on your
own,
And grumbles, ‘This isn’t fair dealing’, My son, leave the Saxon alone.

At the press conference after the Council, I gave a vigorous defence
of our position. I said that the other states should not have ‘expected
me to settle for a third of a loaf. I also refused to accept the
communautaire language about ‘own resources’. I continued to state
without apology that we were talking about Britain’s money, not
Europe’s. I said:
I am only talking about our money, no one else’s; there should be a cash
refund of our money to bring our receipts up to the average level of receipts
in the Community.

Most of the other heads of government were furious. The Irish press
was vitriolic. One British newspaper, The Times, described my
performance at the press conference as ‘bravura’, though there was
more criticism from the leader columns. The best comment, I felt, was
from Le Figaro, which said:
To accuse Mrs Thatcher of wishing to torpedo Europe because she defends
the interests of her country with great determination is to question her
underlying intentions in the same way that people used to question those of
de Gaulle in regard to French interests.

I liked the comparison.
We used the period between the end of the Dublin meeting and the
next European Council to press our case, both in public and through
diplomatic means. On 29 and 30 January I had talks with the Italian
Prime Minister (later President) Francesco Cossiga. I had already had
dealings with Sig. Cossiga in 1979 when the Schild family, my
constituents, were kidnapped in Sardinia. I had found him highly
competent and deeply concerned. He was also a man of principle, as
his earlier resignation as Minister of the Interior after the murder of
the former Christian Democrat Leader Aldo Moro showed, and as I
already knew him to be from my own experience. Italian politics and
Italian politicians do not evoke much understanding or sympathy from
the British, or indeed from the Italians, and I confess to sharing some
of that disenchantment. But Francesco Cossiga was himself a sceptic
about the usual Italian practices. He was the nearest thing to an
independent in Italian politics; in negotiations he always played a
straight hand; he could be relied upon to keep his word, as he did over
the stationing of Cruise missiles in Italy; and he was an undoubted
Anglophile and a strong admirer of the Glorious Revolution of 1688 as
the birth of true liberal politics. I was glad that it was Sig. Cossiga who

was due to host the next European Council.
On 25 February Helmut Schmidt came to London again. Our talks
centred on the question of our budget contribution and on the German
Chancellor’s repeated wish to see sterling within the ERM, and —
contrary to the usual misleading press reports — they were useful and
quite jolly. On 27 and 28 March there was a full scale Anglo-German
summit in London. I sought once more to stress how seriously we felt
about the British contribution. Subsequently, I learned that Helmut
Schmidt had been telling other Community governments that if there
were no solution there was a danger that we would withhold British
contributions to the Community. So I had created the desired
impression. The European Council due for 31 March and 1 April had
to be postponed because of a political crisis in Italy (not an unusual
event), but we pressed for a new Council before the end of April and it
was finally called for Sunday and Monday 27 and 28, to meet in
Luxemburg.
At this time, there was a marked hardening of public opinion in
Britain as the result of our treatment by the Community. In particular,
there was much speculation about possible withholding of Britain’s
contributions, which did not displease me, though I was cautious in
public on the subject. I said on Panorama on 25 February that we
would consider withholding but would be loath to do it because it
meant going against Community law. I also went on French television
on 10 March and said:
I wouldn’t expect France to be the biggest contributor if she had an income
below average in the Community. And I do indeed assure you that your very
distinguished French politicians would be the first to complain if that were
so.
I gave an interview to Die Welt in which I said:
We shall do our utmost to prevent matters coming to a crisis. But it must be
realized that things cannot continue like this.

The atmosphere in Luxemburg turned out to be a good deal better
than in Dublin. I was optimistic. From a discussion I had had with Sig.
Cossiga, who had spoken to President Giscard, it seemed at first that
the French were prepared to set a ceiling on the size of our net
contributions for a period of years irrespective of the growth in the
overall Community budget, subject to review at the end of the period.
This would have been a step forward. On closer examination,
however, it became clear that what the French really wanted was to
get decisions on their most politically sensitive topics — farm prices in
the CAP, lamb and fishing rights — before settling the budget. Finally,
it was agreed that parallel meetings should be held over the weekend:
Agriculture ministers would meet and so would a group of officials
working on the budget issue.

As a result we did not get around to talking about the budget at all
at our first session. Indeed, only after dinner, and the usual foreign
affairs tour de table, did I obtain agreement that the official group
should resume effective negotiation that evening. The French were the
main stumbling block: the proposals their officials presented were
much less helpful to us than President Giscard’s had seemed to be. In
the meantime, the Agriculture ministers of the other governments of
the Community had agreed on a package of proposals which would
have raised farm prices, increasing again the proportion of the
Community budget devoted to agriculture (quite contrary to the
proposals put forward in Dublin) and giving the French a sheep meat
regime which was more or less all that they wanted. Against this — for
us — distinctly unfavourable background, we received eventually the
offer of a limit on our net contribution of about £325 million, applying
only to the year 1980. Under a subsequent proposal our net
contribution would have been limited to about £550 million for 1981
as well.
My reaction was that this was too little. But above all I was not
prepared to have a settlement that only lasted for two years. Helmut
Schmidt, Roy Jenkins (President of the Commission) and almost
everyone else urged me to settle. But I was not willing to return the
following year to face precisely the same problem and the attitude that
went with it. So I rejected the offer. The draft communiqué, moreover,
was unacceptable to us since it continued to insist on the old dogma
that ‘own resources are intended to provide the finance for
Community policies; they are not contributions from member states.’
Nor did it make reference to the assurances we had been given on our
accession to the Community that action would be taken ‘should an
unacceptable situation arise’.
Many reacted to my decision in luxemburg with disbelief: in some
circles the very last thing expected of a British prime minister was that
he or she should quite so unashamedly defend British interests. But
there was, I noted, a contrast between the reaction in some of the
press which was extremely hostile and the reaction in the House of
Commons and the country, which was thoroughly supportive.
In fact, we were a good deal closer to a settlement than was widely
recognized. Great progress had already been made in winning
agreement to substantial reductions in our contribution. What
remained was to secure these reductions for the first two years with a
reliable undertaking for the third. We had a number of powerful levers
by which we could apply pressure to this end. The French were
increasingly desperate to achieve their aims in the Agriculture Council.
There was even talk of overriding the British veto by abrogating the
so-called Luxemburg compromise of 1966, established to
accommodate de Gaulle. (This was an understanding rather than a
formal agreement with the force of law, which enabled any one
country to block a majority decision when its vital national interests

were at stake.) In fact, precisely this did happen at the Agriculture
Council in May 1982 — and this during the Falklands War. However,
at this particular time it would have been a dangerous move,
particularly since the French had already been found in breach of
Community law over lamb imports. The Germans, too, were keen to
see higher agricultural prices. Most important of all, the Community
would, we thought, probably reach the limit of its financial resources
in 1982. Its persistent overspending was catching up with it, and
greater resources could only be made available with British
agreement. Ultimately our negotiating position was a strong one.
It soon became clear that Luxemburg, following the clashes in
Dublin, had had the desired effect. In spite of talk of the Luxemburg
offer having now been ‘withdrawn’, there was evidence of a general
desire to solve the budget issue before the next full European Council
at Venice in June. The easiest way to achieve this appeared to be a
meeting of the Community Foreign ministers.
Peter Carrington, having received his mandate from me, flew to
Brussels on Thursday 29 May with Ian Gilmour. After a marathon
eighteen-hour session they came back with what they considered an
acceptable agreement, arriving at lunch time on Friday to brief me at
Chequers.
My immediate reaction was far from favourable. The deal involved a
net budget contribution in 1980 higher than envisaged at Luxemburg.
It appeared from Peter’s figures that we would pay rather less under
the new package in 1981, though to some extent this was sleight of
hand, reflecting different assumptions about the size of that year’s
total budget. But the Brussels proposal had one great advantage: it
now offered us a three-year solution. We were promised a major
review of the budget problem by mid-1981 and if this had not been
achieved (as proved to be the case) the Commission would make
proposals along the lines of the formula for 1980–81 and the Council
would act accordingly. The other elements of the Brussels package
relating to agriculture, lamb and fisheries, were more or less
acceptable. We had to agree a 5 per cent rise in farm prices. Overall,
the deal marked a refund of two-thirds of our net contribution and it
marked huge progress from the position the Government had
inherited. I therefore decided to accept the offer.
CRISES IN THE MIDDLE EAST
Wider international affairs had not stood still while we were engaged
in bringing Rhodesia to legal independence and negotiating a
reduction in our Community Budget contribution. In November 1979,
forty-nine American diplomatic personnel had been taken hostage in
Iran, a source of deep and growing humiliation to the greatest western
power. In December at the invitation of President Carter I made a
short visit to the United States — the first of many as Prime Minister.

In a short speech at my reception on the White House Lawn I went out
of my way to reaffirm my support for American leadership of the
West. Then in a speech the next day in New York I warned of the
dangers of Soviet ambitions and urged the need for strong western
defence:
The immediate threat from the Soviet Union is military rather than
ideological. The threat is not only to our security in Europe and North
America but also, both directly and by proxy, in the Third World … we can
argue about Soviet motives but the fact is that the Russians have the
weapons and are getting more of them. It is simple prudence for the West to
respond.

I also undertook to support the United States in the UN Security
Council in seeking international economic sanctions against Iran under
Chapter 7 of the UN Charter. The President and I discussed defence
and the situation in Ulster. I took the opportunity to thank him for all
he had been doing behind the scenes in the final stages of the
negotiations on Rhodesia.
Then, at the end of 1979, the world reached one of those genuine
watersheds which are so often predicted, which so rarely occur — and
which take almost everyone by surprise when they do: the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. In April 1978, the Government of Afghanistan
had been overthrown in a communist-inspired coup; a pro-Soviet
government was established, which, however, was met by widespread
opposition and eventual rebellion. In September 1979 the new
President, Taraki, was himself overthrown and killed by his deputy,
Hafizullah Amin. On 27 December, Amin in turn was overthrown and
killed, to be replaced by Babrak Karmal, whose regime was supported
by thousands of Soviet troops.
The Soviets had long considered Afghanistan to have a special
strategic significance and sought to exercise influence there through
so-called ‘Treaties of Friendship’. It was said that they were probably
concerned, in the light of events in Iran, at the possibility of anarchy
in Afghanistan leading to a second fundamentalist Muslim state on
their borders, which might destabilize their own subject Muslim
population. The West had for some time been anxious that the Soviets
would make a drive for the oil in the Gulf. And the energy crisis gave
them a still stronger reason to do so.
Perhaps I was less shocked than some by the invasion of
Afghanistan. I had long understood that détente had been ruthlessly
used by the Soviets to exploit western weakness and disarray. I knew
the beast.
What had happened in Afghanistan was only part of a wider pattern.
The Soviets had instigated Cubans and East Germans to advance their
aims and ambitions in Africa. They had been working to further
communist subversion throughout the Third World, and for all the talk
of international peace and friendship, they had built up armed forces
far beyond their defensive needs. Whatever their precise motives now

in Afghanistan, they must have known that they had threatened the
stability of Pakistan and Iran — the latter unstable enough already
under the Ayatollah — and were within 300 miles of the Straits of
Hormuz. Moreover, bad as the situation was in itself, it could be worse
as a precedent. There were other areas of the world in which the
Soviets might prefer aggression to diplomacy, if they now prevailed:
for example, Marshal Tito was evidently approaching the end of his
life in Yugoslavia and there could be opportunities for Soviet
intervention there. They clearly had to be punished for their
aggression and taught, albeit belatedly, that the West would not only
talk about freedom but was prepared to make sacrifices to defend it.
On Friday 28 December President Carter rang me at Chequers and
we discussed at length what the Soviets were doing in Afghanistan and
what our reaction should be. What had happened was a bitter blow to
him. Britain had not felt able to comply with all that the Americans
had wanted of us in response to the hostage crisis: in particular, we
were not willing (or indeed legally able) to freeze Iranian financial
assets, which would have had a devastating effect on international
confidence in the City of London as a world financial centre. However,
I was determined that we should follow America’s lead now in taking
action against the USSR and its puppet regime in Kabul. We therefore
decided on a range of measures, including the curtailment of visits and
contacts, non-renewal of the Anglo-Soviet credit agreement and a
tightening of the rules on technology transfer. I also sought to mobilize
the governments of the European Community to support the
Americans. But, like President Carter, I was sure that the most
effective thing we could do would be to prevent their using the
forthcoming
Moscow
Olympics
for
propaganda
purposes.
Unfortunately, most of the British Olympic team decided to attend the
Games, though we tried to persuade them otherwise: of course, unlike
their equivalents in the Soviet Union, our athletes were left free to
make up their own minds. At the UN our ambassador, Tony Parsons,
helped to rally the ‘non-aligned’ countries to condemn the Soviet
Union’s aggression. In London, on 3 January, I saw the Soviet
Ambassador to enlarge in vigorous terms on the contents of my
exchanges by telegram with President Brezhnev.
From now on, the whole tone of international affairs began to
change, and for the better. Hard-headed realism and strong defence
became the order of the day. The Soviets had made a fatal
miscalculation: they had prepared the way for the renaissance of
America under Ronald Reagan.
But this was the future. America had still to go through the
humiliating agony of the failed attempt to rescue the Iranian hostages.
As I watched President Carter’s television broadcast explaining what
had happened, I felt America’s wound as if it were Britain’s own; and
in a sense it was, for anyone who exposed American weakness
increased ours. I was soon, though, in a position to demonstrate that

there would be no flinching when it came to dealing with our own
brand of Middle East terrorism.
I first learned of the terrorist attack on the Iranian Embassy at
Prince’s Gate in Knightsbridge on Wednesday 30 April during a visit I
was making to the BBC. The early reports were, in fact, misleadingly
anodyne. It soon became known, however, that several gunmen had
forced their way into the Iranian Embassy and were holding twenty
hostages — most of them Iranian staff, but also including a policeman
who had been on duty outside and two BBC journalists who had been
applying for visas. The gunmen were threatening to blow up both the
embassy and the hostages if their demands were not met. The
terrorists belonged to an organization calling itself ‘the Group of the
Martyr’; they were Iranian Arabs from Arabistan, Iraqi-trained and
bitterly opposed to the prevailing regime in Iran. They demanded that
a list of 91 prisoners be set free by the Iranian Government, that the
rights of Iranian dissidents should be recognized and a special
aeroplane provided to take them and the hostages out of Britain. The
Iranian Government had no intention of conceding these demands; and
we, for our part, had no intention of allowing terrorists to succeed in
their hostage taking. I was conscious that, though the group involved
was a different one, this was no less an attempt to exploit perceived
western weakness than was the hostage taking of the American
embassy personnel in Tehran. My policy would be to do everything
possible to resolve the crisis peacefully, without unnecessarily risking
the lives of the hostages, but above all to ensure that terrorism should
be — and be seen to be — defeated.
Willie Whitelaw, as Home Secretary, took immediate charge of
operations from the special emergency unit in the Cabinet Office. The
unit is immediately activated when a security crisis occurs. On it
representatives of the Cabinet Office, Home Office, Foreign Office,
military, police and intelligence services advise a minister in the chair
— usually, as on this occasion, the Home Secretary; I only once and
briefly took this role at the time of the hijack of an aircraft from
Tanzania to Stansted. Hour by hour information is gathered, sifted and
analysed so that every circumstance and option can be properly
evaluated. Throughout the crisis, Willie kept in regular contact with
me. In turn the Metropolitan Police kept in touch with the terrorists by
a specially laid telephone line. We also made contact with those who
might be able to exert some influence over the gunmen. The latter
wished to have an Arab country’s ambassador act as intermediary. But
we were extremely doubtful about this: there was a risk that the
objectives of such an intermediary would be different from our own.
Moreover, the Jordanians, whom we were prepared to trust, refused to
become involved. A Muslim imam did talk to the terrorists, but
without result. It was a stalemate.
Willie and I were completely agreed as to the strategy. We would try
patient negotiation; but if any hostages were wounded we would

consider an attack on the embassy; and if a hostage were killed we
would definitely send in the Special Air Service (SAS). There had to be
some flexibility. But what was ruled out from the start was to let the
terrorists leave, with or without the hostages.
The position began to deteriorate on Sunday afternoon. I was called
back early from Chequers and we were driving back to London when a
further message came over the car-phone. There was too much
interference on the line to be able to talk easily so I had my driver pull
into a lay-by. Apparently, the information was that the hostages’ lives
were now at risk. Willie wanted my permission to send in the SAS.
‘Yes, go in’: I said. The car pulled back out onto the road, while I tried
to visualize what was happening and waited for the outcome.
Executed with the superb courage and professionalism the world now
expects of the SAS, the assault took place in the full glare of the
television cameras. Of the 19 hostages known to be alive at the time of
the assault all were rescued. Four gunmen were killed; one was
captured; none escaped. I breathed a sigh of relief when I learned that
there were no police or SAS casualties. Later I went to the Regent’s
Park Barracks to congratulate our men. I was met by Peter de la
Billière, the SAS commander, and then watched what had happened
on television news, with a running commentary, punctuated by
relieved laughter, from those involved in the assault. One of them
turned to me and said, ‘we never thought you’d let us do it.’ Wherever
I went over the next few days, I sensed a great wave of pride at the
outcome; telegrams of congratulation poured in from abroad: we had
sent a signal to terrorists everywhere that they could expect no deals
and would extort no favours from Britain.
The Middle East continued to occupy my attention throughout the
rest of 1980. At the European Council in Venice on 12 and 13 June the
heads of government discussed Israel and the Palestinian question. The
key issue was whether the Community governments were to call for
the PLO to be ‘associated with’ the Middle East peace talks, or to
‘participate in’ them: I was very much against the latter course, for as
long as the PLO did not reject terrorism. In fact, the final communiqué
reflected what seemed to me the right balance: it reaffirmed the right
of all the states in the region — including Israel — to existence and
security, but also demanded justice for all peoples, which implied
recognition of of the Palestinians’ right to self-determination. So, of
course, it pleased no one.
Then the Middle East focus shifted again. In September 1980 Iraq
attacked Iran and we were once again in the throes of a new crisis,
with potentially dangerous political and economic implications for
western interests. Saddam Hussein had decided that the chaos in Iran
provided him with a good opportunity to renounce the 1975 Algiers
Settlement of the two countries’ disputed claims to the Shatt-al-Arab
waterway and seize it by force.

Shortly after the outbreak of the war Peter Carrington came over to
Chequers to discuss the situation with me. I was chiefly concerned to
prevent the conflict spreading down the Gulf and involving the
vulnerable oil-rich Gulf States, which had traditionally close links with
Britain. I told Peter that I did not share the common view that the
Iranians would quickly be beaten. They were fanatical fighters and
had an effective airforce with which they could attack oil installations.
I was right: by the end of the year and after initial successes, the Iraqis
became bogged down and the war threatened both the stability of the
Gulf and western shipping. But by this time we had put in the Armilla
Patrol to protect our ships.
As I looked back on the international scene that Christmas of 1980
at Chequers, I reflected that the successes of British foreign policy had
helped us through a particularly dark and difficult time in domestic,
and particularly economic, affairs. But as in economic matters so in
foreign affairs I knew that we were only starting the course. Tackling
Britain’s Community budget problem was only the first step to
reforming the Community’s finances. Bringing Rhodesia to legal
independence was but a prelude to addressing the problem of South
Africa. The West’s response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
would have to be a fundamental rethinking of our relations with the
communist bloc and this had barely begun. The renewed instability in
the Gulf as a result of Iraq’s attack on Iran would ultimately require a
new commitment by the western powers to the security of the region.
All these issues were to dominate British foreign policy in the years
ahead.
North Sea oil would soon give Britain an exceptional position among the major
industrial powers, as we became a net oil exporter; but, of course, international
recession would hit the markets for our industries: we were, therefore, not immune to
the international consequences of the oil price rise.
*

CHAPTER IV

Not At All Right, Jack
The restructuring of British industry and trade union reform in 1979–
1980

BRITAIN’S INDUSTRIAL PROBLEMS
In the years since the war British politics had focused, above all, on
the debate about the proper role of the state in the operation of the
economy. By 1979 and perhaps earlier, optimism about the beneficent
effects of government intervention had largely disappeared. This
change of attitude, for which I had long worked and argued, meant
that many people who had not previously been Conservative
supporters were now prepared to give our approach at least the benefit
of the doubt. But I knew that this entirely justified lack of faith in the
wisdom of the state must be matched by a renewed confidence in the
creative capacity of enterprise.
A sort of cynical disdain, often disguised as black humour, had come
to characterize many people’s attitude to industry and unions. We all
enjoyed the film I’m All Right, Jack, but the problem was no laughing
matter.
British goods will only be attractive if they can compete with the
best on offer from other countries, in respect of quality, reliability and
price, or some combination of the three, and the truth is that too often
British industrial products were uncompetitive. This was not simply
because the strong pound was making it difficult to sell abroad, but
because our industrial reputation had steadily been eroded. In the end
reputation reflects reality. Nothing less than changing that reality —
fundamentally and for the better — would do.
In spite of what might seem the more immediate and pressing
problems of strikes, price competitiveness and international recession,
the root of Britain’s industrial problem was low productivity. British
living standards were lower than those of our principal competitors
and the number of well-paid and reasonably secure jobs was smaller
because we produced less per person than they did. Some twenty-five
years earlier our productivity was the highest in western Europe; by
1979 it was among the lowest. The overmanning resulting from trade
union restrictive practices was concealed unemployment; and beyond
a certain point — certainly beyond the point we had reached in 1979
— overmanning would bring down businesses and destroy existing
jobs, and abort those which otherwise could have flourished. Outdated
capacity and old jobs have to go to make the most of new
opportunities. Yet the paradox which neither British trade unions nor

the socialists were prepared to accept was that an increase in
productivity is likely, initially, to reduce the number of jobs before
creating the wealth that sustains new ones. Time and again we were
asked when plants and companies closed, ‘where will the new jobs
come from?’ As the months went by, we could point to the expansion
of self-employment and to industrial successes in aerospace, chemicals
and North Sea oil. Increasingly we could also look to foreign
investment, for example in electronics and cars. But the fact is that in
a market economy government does not — and cannot — know where
jobs will come from: if it did know, all those interventionist policies
for ‘picking winners’ and ‘backing success’ would not have picked
losers and compounded failure.

Because our analysis of what was wrong with Britain’s industrial
performance centred on low productivity and its causes — rather than
on levels of pay — incomes policy had no place in our economic
strategy. I was determined that the Government should not become
enmeshed, as previous Labour and Conservative administrations had
been, in the obscure intricacies of ‘norms’, ‘going rates’ and ‘special
cases’. Of course, pay rises at this time were far too high in large parts
of British industry where profits were small or nonexistent, investment
was inadequate, or market prospects looked poor. Judged by relative
labour costs, our level of competitiveness in 1980 was some 40 to 50
per cent worse than in 1978: and around three-fifths of this was due to
UK unit labour costs increasing at a faster rate than those abroad, with
only two-fifths the result of exchange rate appreciation. There was
little, if anything, we could do to influence the exchange rate, without
allowing inflation to rise still further and faster. But there was a great
deal which trade union negotiators had it in their power to do if they
wished to prevent their own members and others being priced out of
jobs; and as the scale of union irresponsibility grew apparent, talk of
the need for a pay policy began to be heard.
So it was important that from the very beginning — even before we
had realized the extent of the pay explosion which was under way — I
stood firm against suggestions of pay policies. Some senior colleagues
supported a return to incomes policy: shortly after we took office Jim
Prior argued for early talks with the TUC and CBI about pay. We had
already had vigorous disagreements on the issue in Opposition. The
Right Approach to the Economy had gone further than I would have
liked in proposing a ‘forum’ for discussion between employers and
unions of the pay implications of government economic policy. A far
weaker reference had been included in the 1979 manifesto. I had now
come to feel that all such talk was at best irrelevant and at worst
misguided.
Of course, it is of great importance that all those involved in wage
bargaining should know and understand the economic framework in
which they are operating and the facts of life confronting their
particular business. Within a given money supply (provided that the

government sticks to it), the more taken out in higher pay, the less
available for investment, and the smaller the number of jobs.
Some people offered what they thought of as the ‘German model’.
We were all conscious of Germany’s economic success. Indeed, we had
helped create the conditions for it after the war by introducing
competition and restructuring their trade unions. There were those in
Britain who went further than this and said that we should copy the
German corporatist tendency of making national economic decisions in
consultation with business organizations and trade union leaders.
However, what might work for Germany would not necessarily work
for us. The German experience of hyperinflation between the wars
meant that nearly everyone there was deeply conscious of the need to
keep inflation down, even at the expense of a short-term rise in
unemployment. German trade unions were also far more responsible
than ours, and of course the German character is different, less
individualistic and more regimented. So the ‘German model’ was
inappropriate for Britain.
In any case, we already had the National Economic Development
Council (NEDC) in which ministers, employers and trade unionists met
from time to time. And so I was quite sure that we should not proceed
further with the idea of a new ‘forum’. In fact, I felt that we should do
all that we could to reinforce the contrary view: the whole approach
based on prices and incomes controls should be swept away. The
Government would set the framework, but it was for businesses and
workforces to make their own choices, and to face the consequences of
their actions, good and bad. In the private sector rates of pay must be
determined by what businesses could afford, depending on their
profitability and productivity. In the public sector also affordability
was the key — in this case meaning the scale of the burden it was
right to ask the taxpayer and ratepayer to bear. Given that government
was the ultimate owner and banker, however, the mechanism by
which these disciplines could be made effective was bound to be less
clear and direct than in the private sector.
THE 1980 BUDGET AND THE MEDIUM TERM FINANCIAL STRATEGY
(MTFS)
The income tax cuts in our 1979 budget were intended to give more
incentives to work. But the budget of 1980 was still more directly
focused on improving our underlying economic performance. Towards
the end of February Geoffrey Howe came to see me to discuss the
shape of it. We were agreed entirely about the monetary and fiscal
position: we would continue with the present money supply targets,
which were still not being met, and keep the PSBR at the same level as
the previous year.
However, I was more concerned about his tax proposals. There was
no doubt about the difficulties industry was facing. Very high pay

awards had left firms short of cash, though oil companies were in a
better position due to the oil price rise. There was, therefore, a strong
argument for a budget which helped business. On the other hand, I
certainly did not want to see personal incentives diminished. It was
going to be difficult to get the balance right. In any case, there was
also a question of the precise means to help industry. My instinct was
to go for a lower PSBR and so bring down interest rates. But many in
industry wanted us to cut the National Insurance Surcharge (NIS) — a
tax introduced by Labour, which had substantially raised business
costs. Geoffrey had also been pressing from the previous December for
a package of capital tax cuts and reliefs.
In the end we settled on a ‘budget for business’, but only by fairly
modest and inexpensive measures. Geoffrey Howe’s second budget on
26 March 1980 helped small businesses through enterprise zones,*
gave tax relief to encourage the investment of venture capital, and
introduced building allowances for small workshops.
As regards income tax, personal allowances generally were raised in
line with inflation. But the lower rate band of 25 per cent, which we
had inherited from the Labour Party and which complicated the tax
system, was abolished. To balance this we raised the thresholds of the
higher rate bands by about seven percentage points less than inflation.
The budget also announced difficult and unpopular measures on
prescription charges and social security benefits.
However, the most important aspect of the 1980 budget related to
monetary policy rather than taxation. We announced in the budget our
Medium Term Financial Strategy (quickly known as the MTFS), which
was to remain at the heart of our economic policies throughout the
period of their success and which was only relegated in importance in
those final years, when Nigel Lawson’s imprudence had already begun
to steer us to disaster. A little historical irony is provided by the fact
that Nigel himself, as Financial Secretary, signed the Financial
Statement and Budget Report (FSBR), or ‘Red Book’, in which the
MTFS first burst on an astonished world, that he had contributed much
to its preparation and that he was its most brilliant and committed
exponent.
The MTFS was intended to set the monetary framework for the
economy over a period of years. The aim was to bring down inflation
by decreasing monetary growth, while curbing borrowing to ensure
that the pressure of disinflation did not fall solely on the private sector
in the form of higher interest rates. The monetary figures for later
years that we announced in 1980 were illustrative rather than firm
targets — though this did not prevent commentators poking tiresome,
if predictable, fun when the targets were altered or not met. The 1980
MTFS figures for the money supply were expressed in sterling M3
(£M3), though the Red Book noted that ‘the way in which the money
supply is defined for target purposes may need to be adjusted from
time to time as circumstances change,’ an important qualification. *

Not all of those who shared our fundamental economic objectives
entirely welcomed the MTFS. To some it seemed like a new version of
Labour’s 1965 ‘National Plan’. Others questioned whether it would
succeed in affecting expectations in the economy as we intended, and
wondered what would happen if it did not. But there was a crucial
difference between the MTFS and the old style economic planning. We
were seeking to secure greater financial stability, within which
business and individuals could operate with confidence. We knew that
we could do this only by controlling those things which government
could control — namely the money supply and public borrowing. Most
post-war economic planning, by contrast, sought to control such things
as output and employment, which ultimately government could not
control, through batteries of regulations on investment, pay and
prices, that distorted the operation of the economy and threatened
personal liberty. The MTFS broke with all of this. Certainly, no one
could guarantee that people would adjust their behaviour to take
account of the MTFS; indeed, pay bargainers, particularly in the public
sector, conspicuously failed to do so, at least in the early period. The
MTFS would only influence expectations in so far as people believed in
our determination to stick to it: its credibility depended on that of the
Government — and ultimately, therefore, on the quality of my own
commitment, about which I would leave no one in doubt. I would not
bow to demands to reflate: it was this which turned the MTFS from an
ambitious aspiration into the cornerstone of a successful policy.
FIRST STEPS OF TRADE UNION REFORM: THE 1980 EMPLOYMENT
ACT
A firm financial strategy was necessary to improve our economic
performance: but we never believed that it would be sufficient, even
with tax cuts and deregulation of industry. We also had to deal with
the problem of trade union power, made worse by successive Labour
governments and exploited by the communists and militants who had
risen to key positions within the trade union movement — positions
which they ruthlessly exploited in the callous strikes of the winter of
1978–9.
The economic effects of union power were still painfully clear. Pay
rises were soaring while business prospects plummeted with the onset
of recession. The engineering industry dispute in 1979 provided a
good demonstration of how much poison excessive trade union power
and privilege had injected into British industry — and not just the
public but the private sector too. The engineering industry had every
commercial reason to reduce costs so as to compete. Yet after a tenweek strike, the employers, the Engineering Employers’ Federation
(EEF), conceded a 39-hour week, increases of £13 a week for skilled
men and an extra week’s holiday phased over four years, all of this
greatly increasing their costs. The EEF had crumbled and, because of

the centralized system of pay bargaining, employers throughout the
industry had also given in. The EEF had long accepted the closed shop
as an unavoidable fact of life. So the unions’ power over their
members was more or less absolute. Some employers, in search of a
quiet life, preferred it that way. But it meant that when a dispute did
occur the trade union was able to exercise what amounted to
intimidation over its members — ‘lawful intimidation’ in the unhappy
phrase coined by Labour’s former Attorney-General, Sam Silkin. Those
who wanted to continue working could be threatened by the union
with expulsion and the consequent loss of their job. The engineering
strike was not a political strike, nor one which threatened to bring
ordinary life to a halt. But it was precisely the sort of strike which no
country fighting for its industrial future could afford — an object
lesson in what was wrong. Its consequences damaged the whole
industry for years to come.
Indeed, for the greater part of my term of office the need for new
steps in trade union reform was repeatedly demonstrated by industrial
disputes. The disadvantage of this was that, in a sense, we were always
behind events, learning the lessons of the last strike. The advantage
was, however, that we could point to recent abuses to justify reform
and could therefore rely on public opinion to help us push it through.
On 14 May 1979, less than a fortnight after I formed the
Government, Jim Prior wrote to me setting out his plans for trade
union reform. There was a certain amount that we could do at once.
We could set up our promised inquiry into the coercive recruitment
practices of the printing union SLADE — which would deal also with
the activities of the NGA in the advertising industry. We could also
make certain changes to employment legislation by Order in Council,
with the aim of reducing the heavy burden placed — on small firms in
particular — by the provisions on unfair dismissal and redundancy.
But we would have to consult with employers and unions quite
extensively about our main proposals on secondary picketing, the
closed shop and ballots. As a result, the larger changes we wanted
would not be in place in time for strikes which might occur that
winter. Jim Prior was optimistic that if the TUC was properly handled
— and he thought that he could handle the TUC — they would not
reject our proposals outright. The CBI was also, as usual, opposed to
any ‘precipitate’ action. In reply I pointed out that they would be the
first people to complain if secondary picketing started again. I also
made it clear that I thought that a bill must be published by
November, if at all possible, and should reach its committee stage in
the Commons before Christmas. I had a further discussion with Jim
about tactics on the afternoon of Wednesday 6 June. Jim said that for
purposes of negotiation his proposals to the TUC would go somewhat
further than those in our manifesto, but I insisted that our final
position should not be less than the manifesto — a significantly
different emphasis.

Two weeks later Jim set out his proposals in a Cabinet paper. These
were very similar to those which were ultimately contained in the
1980 Act. They covered three main areas: picketing, the closed shop
and ballots. We planned to limit the specific immunities for picketing,
given under the legislation of 1974 and 1976, strictly to those who
were themselves party to the dispute and who were picketing at the
premises of their own employer. Powers would be taken to issue a
statutory code on picketing. Where there was a closed shop, we
proposed to give employees who might be dismissed for refusing to
join a union the right to apply to an industrial tribunal for
compensation. There would be a legal right of complaint for those
arbitrarily expelled or excluded from union membership. We would
extend the present protection for employees who objected to joining a
union because of deeply held personal conviction. A new closed shop
could in future only be established if an overwhelming majority of
workers voted for it by secret ballot. A statutory code relating to the
closed shop would be drawn up. Finally, the Secretary of State for
Employment would be given power to reimburse trade unions for the
postal and administrative costs of secret ballots.
These early proposals were as notable for what they did not contain
as for what they did. At this stage they did not extend to the question
of secondary action other than secondary picketing, nor did they deal
with the wider question of trade union immunities. In particular, they
left alone the crucial immunity which prevented action being taken by
the courts against union funds. On the first of these points —
secondary action — we were awaiting the conclusions of the House of
Lords in the important case of Express Newspapers v. MacShane.* It is
worth noting that the changes we made in all these areas, including
that of picketing, were changes in the civil, not the criminal, law. In
public discussion of subsequent strikes this distinction was often lost.
The civil law could only change the way in which unions behaved if
employers or, in some cases, workers were prepared to use it. They
had to bring the case. By contrast, the criminal law on picketing,
which was clarified but not substantially altered in the years ahead,
had to be enforced by the police and the courts. Although the
Government would make it clear that the police enjoyed its moral
support and would improve police equipment and training, the
constitutional limits on us in this area were real and sometimes
frustrating.
As the summer wore on, it became obvious that although the TUC
was prepared to talk to the Government about our proposals, it had no
intention of actually co-operating with them. On 25 June at their
request I met the TUC General Council. I was depressed, but not a bit
surprised, to discover that there was no willingness on their side to
face economic facts or to try to understand the economic strategy we
were pursuing. I told the TUC that we all wanted high living standards
and more jobs, but that if people wanted a German standard of living

then they must achieve a German standard of output. When the TUC
said that they wanted more government spending, I pointed out that
there was no shortage of demand in the economy: the problem was
that because of our uncompetitiveness that demand was being met by
imports. I got nowhere. The TUC Conference in September was
marked by unreasoning and unqualified opposition to everything we
proposed — even the provision of funds for secret ballots in which no
compulsion was involved, other than the moral pressure to consult
their own members.
On the evening of Wednesday 12 September I held a meeting with
Geoffrey Howe, Jim Prior and other colleagues to plan our strategy. I
thought that it was hopeless trying to change the attitudes of most
trade union leaders, who were socialist politicians first, second and
third. Instead, we agreed that we must appeal over their heads to their
members.
I was convinced that rank-and-file unionists felt very differently to
the union bosses about the reforms. In due course, we must liberate
them by breaking down the closed shop and by ensuring genuine
democracy within the unions; then they themselves would bring the
extremists and union apparatchiks into line. But until we could make
such changes — and it would take more than our present bill to do
that — all we could do was to call for their support as persuasively
and powerfully as we could.
So time and again I drummed home the message that it was
ordinary trade unionists and their families who were hurt by the
irresponsible use of trade union power. For example, in my speech to
the Party Conference in Blackpool on Friday 12 October 1979, I said:
The days when only employers suffered from a strike are long since past.
Today strikes affect trade union members and their families just like the rest
of us. One union can deprive us all of coal, or food, or transport easily
enough. What it cannot do is defend its members against similar action by
other unions … Recently there was a strike which prevented telephone bills
from being sent. The cost of that strike to the Post Office is £110 million. It
will have to be paid for by everyone who uses the telephone … The recent
two-days-a-week strike by the Engineering Union lost industry £2 billion in
sales. We may never make up those sales and we shall lose some of the jobs
which depend on them.

I developed this theme again when I spoke to the Conservative
Trade Unionists’ (CTU) Conference in Nottingham on Saturday 17
November. Strikes were not the only problem; rather, it was the whole
socialist economic approach to which the union bosses were wedded,
and in particular their preference for monopoly and protection. I took
the example of British Steel — which soon became all too topical — to
make the point:
British Steel would like to import coking coal to make its steel more
competitive. But the NUM opposes this saying, ‘Buy our coking coal, even if
it is more expensive.’ If British Steel agree, they must, in turn, say to the car
manufacturers, ‘Buy our steel, even if it is more expensive.’ But then British

Leyland and the other car manufacturers have to ask the consumer, ‘Please
buy our cars even if they are more expensive.’ But we are all consumers and
as consumers we all want a choice. We want to buy the best value for
money. If foreign cars, or washing machines, are cheaper or better than
British, the consumer wants the choice. There is a broken circuit. Producers
want a protected market for their products. That is the union demand. But
the same trade unionists, as consumers, want an open market. They cannot
both win. But they can both lose.

In the last part of 1979 and the early months of 1980 we continued
refining the Employment Bill and spent a good deal of time on the
question of secondary action and immunities. We also discussed item
by item measures to deal with the burdens which past Labour
legislation had placed on industry. One such burden was Schedule 11
of the Employment Protection Act, 1975. Schedule 11 was a typical
case: it showed how an apparently harmless measure, introduced for
the best of motives, could defeat the intentions of its originators and
result in higher unemployment. Schedule 11 provided that the
‘recognized terms and conditions’ of employment for a particular
industry should apply throughout that industry. The original aim was
to deal with pockets of low pay; the principle had wartime
antecedents, but in recent years it had been exploited by higher paid
groups, such as those working for the BBC. In that instance the
unfortunate television licence holder had to foot the bill. Generally, by
forcing wage levels up to the level obtaining in the strongest firms,
Schedule 11 caused jobs to be lost.
But by far the most contested issue was that of trade union
immunities. Our proposals on secondary picketing had already begun
to address it. But we now took a further step. We had received the
report of the enquiry set up earlier into the recruitment activities of
the printing union SLADE, undertaken by Mr Andrew Leggatt QC* In
response, we decided to remove the immunity where industrial
disruption was called or threatened by people other than those directly
working for a particular firm with the intention of coercing its
employees into joining a trade union.
We decided to go further, following the House of Lords decision in
the MacShane case on 13 December. The MacShane case was important
because it confirmed the wide scope of existing immunities in the case
of secondary action. Most of the immunities then enjoyed by trade
unions had their origin in the Trade Disputes Act (1906), which
Labour extended significantly after its narrow election victory in
October 1974. The MacShane case arose from a dispute that began in
1978 between the National Union of Journalists (NUJ) and a number
of provincial newspapers. The provincial papers managed to keep
going during the dispute by publishing stories supplied to them by the
Press Association. The NUJ unsuccessfully attempted to prevent this,
first, by direct appeal to NUJ members working for the Press
Association and then, when that failed, by instructing its people on
national newspapers to black Press Association material altogether. In

response the Daily Express applied for an injunction against the NUJ.
The Court of Appeal in December 1978 ruled in favour of the Express
that the NUJ secondary action had exceeded that which could be
regarded as furthering the objectives of the dispute and therefore did
not enjoy immunity. As a result of this decision, injunctions could be
and were granted. However, when the case went to the House of
Lords, the Appeal Court’s ruling was overturned. Essentially, the Lords
decided that for purposes of law an industrial action was ‘in
furtherance of a trade dispute’, and therefore immune, if trade union
officials genuinely believed it to be so. This subjective test had the
most disturbing implications. It meant that henceforth there would be
virtually unlimited immunity for secondary industrial action.
The position was complicated by the outcome of two other court
cases. One of these — N. W. L. Limited v. Nelson & Wood, or the
‘Nawala Case’ — resulted from the attempts of the International
Transport Workers’ Federation to prevent the employment by a British
shipping company of overseas seamen in British registered ships. The
Federation’s action threatened the future of the British shipping
industry. Still more important, however, was the second case, which
widened the scope for secondary action in the steel strike. The Iron
and Steel Trades Confederation (ISTC) had called out its members in
the private steel sector as part of its dispute with the British Steel
Corporation which had begun on 2 January 1980. Duport Steels, a
private steel company, was granted an injunction by the Court of
Appeal against Bill Sirs, General Secretary of the ISTC. The Court of
Appeal ruled that immunity did not apply in this case because the
ISTC’s argument was essentially with the Government rather than BSC
itself. But again, the House of Lords unanimously reversed this ruling,
relying on broadly the same grounds as in the MacShane case. The
practical result was that the strike spread once more to the private
steel companies.
We were all agreed that the law as now interpreted by the Courts
must be changed. In Opposition, we had opposed all of the moves
Labour made to extend trade union powers and immunities and in our
manifesto we had said that, ‘the protection of the law should be
available to those not concerned in a dispute.’ We agreed that it was
right now to clarify the precise limits of immunity. But we disagreed
both about what immunity, if any, there should be for secondary
action and about the timing of the introduction of the necessary
change into the Employment Bill. Again and again, Jim Prior said that
he did not want decisions about changes in the law to be linked with a
particular dispute. But as the steel strike worsened, with none of our
proposed legislation yet in force — let alone measures to deal with
secondary strikes and blacking — the public criticism grew. I had the
greatest sympathy with the critics, though I wished that some
employers had earlier been rather more robust. Whenever those of us
who felt that we ought to go faster put our case — and our number

included Geoffrey Howe, John Nott, Keith Joseph, Angus Maude, Peter
Thorneycroft and John Hoskyns — Jim Prior was always able to argue
against ‘hasty action’ by reference to the cautious attitude of the CBI.
On the afternoon of Wednesday 30 January Jim came to see me at
his request and poured out a tale of woe. Apparently the unions’ mood
had changed markedly for the worse since Christmas. We were facing
a ‘day of action’ from the unions in Wales. The steel unions had
managed to call out their members in private steel companies. I
replied that, while I had every respect for his views, I did not share his
pessimism.
In fact, by this stage I did not share Jim’s analysis of the situation at
all. He really believed that we had already tried to do too much and
that we should go no further, whether in the area of trade union law
or general economic strategy. I, for my part, had begun bitterly to
regret that we had not made faster progress both in cutting public
expenditure and with trade union reform.
There was, of course, a more profound and general divide between
us. For all his virtues, Jim Prior was an example of a political type that
had dominated and, in my view, damaged the post-war Tory Party. I
call such figures ‘the false squire’. They have all the outward show of a
John Bull — ruddy face, white hair, bluff manner — but inwardly they
are political calculators who see the task of Conservatives as one of
retreating gracefully before the Left’s inevitable advance. Retreat as a
tactic is sometimes necessary; retreat as a settled policy eats at the
soul. In order to justify the series of defeats that his philosophy entails,
the false squire has to persuade rank-and-file Conservatives and indeed
himself that advance is impossible. His whole political life would, after
all, be a gigantic mistake if a policy of positive Tory reform turned out
to be both practical and popular. Hence the passionate and obstinate
resistance mounted by the ‘wets’ to the fiscal, economic and trade
union reforms of the early 1980s. These reforms had either to fail or
be stopped. For if they succeeded, a whole generation of Tory leaders
had despaired unnecessarily. Ian Gilmour expressed this feeling in the
clearest form; but Jim Prior was infected by it too, and it made him
timid and overcautious in his trade union policy. I had to stake out a
more determined approach.
Brian Waiden interviewed me for Weekend World on Sunday 6
January. I used the occasion to say that we would be introducing a
new clause in the Employment Bill to rectify the problem left by the
MacShane judgement. I made it clear that we did not intend to remove
the immunity enjoyed by trade unions as regards action intended to
cause people to break their employment contracts, but would
concentrate on the immunity relating to action designed to cause
employers to break their commercial contracts. I also drew attention
to the way in which trade union immunities had combined with
nationalized monopolies to give huge power to the trade unions in
these industries. We needed to restrict the immunities and to break the

monopolies by introducing competition.
All my instincts told me that we would have strong public support
for further action to restrict union power, and the evidence supported
me. An opinion survey in The Times on 21 January 1980 asked people
the question: ‘Do you think sympathy strikes and blacking are
legitimate weapons to use in an industrial dispute, or should the new
law restrict their use?’ Seventy-one per cent of those who replied —
and 62 per cent of trade unionists who did so — said that a new law
should indeed restrict their use.
It would, though, be difficult to go further without support from
business leaders. On the morning of Tuesday 5 February I had two
meetings with industrialists. The first was with the CBI. Some of them
said that the present bill, as drafted, went as far as possible. On
hearing this I did not conceal my frustration. I said that, with regard to
the timing of more radical measures, there would always be a risk of
confrontation with the trade unions, but that it seemed to me it would
be better to accept the risk over the coming few months than wait
until the autumn when the unions could cause the maximum
disruption. I said that I now regretted that we had not brought
forward more radical proposals when the bill was introduced. This left
us with two possibilities: we could amend the existing bill or announce
in the consultative document which we were planning to issue that
further legislation would be introduced. The CBI went away in no
doubt about my feelings.
The second meeting that day was with the private sector steel
producers. There was a sharp contrast between their outlook and that
of the CBI. They complained that the private steel companies had been
dragged into a dispute not of their making and in which they would be
the only real victims. As a result of the strike they were losing about
£10 million a week. The ISTC had effectively torn up all its procedural
agreements with the private companies and instructed their employees
to strike. It was clear that there was no real grievance on the part of
private sector steel workers: in the Duport Steels case, when the Court
of Appeal had granted its injunction to stop secondary action, there
had been a complete return to work before the Lords reversed the
decision and the private sector strike resumed. The threat of losing
union cards was the decisive factor in persuading private sector
workers to join the strike. In these circumstances it is not surprising
that the private sector steel companies wanted immediate legislation
to outlaw secondary picketing. And there was nothing I was able to
offer them except sympathy.
In answer to a letter from a leading industrialist urging ‘caution’, I
replied setting out my views:
Insofar as we do not effectively change the law we would be positively
confirming what Lord Diplock said [in Duport Steels Limited and others v. Sirs
and others]. We would be indicating that we are not prepared to protect the
person who through no fault of his own has suffered damage at the hands of

another. We should be telling the law-abiding citizen that we prefer to
strengthen the powers of those who inflict injury rather than to help those
who suffer from it.
… You refer to moderate Trade Unionists. I have countless letters from
them pleading with me to strengthen their hand against the militants, telling
me that is why they voted for us and that now this Government by failing to
take effective action has let them down.
If we flinch from this task now, when we have public and massive Trade
Union opinion with us, they are not likely to have much faith in us to do it
next winter.

I finished by quoting Shakespeare’s Measure for Measure:
Our doubts are traitors,
And make us lose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt.

I returned to the task of toughening up the law. Ministers now
agreed to restore the law to what it had been understood to be before
the MacShane judgement, adding further tests relating to the dispute to
be applied by the Courts. There would not, however, be a total ban on
secondary action. There followed a short period for consultation and
the new clause was introduced into the Employment Bill at the Report
Stage in the House of Commons on 17 April 1980, limiting immunity
for secondary action which broke or interfered with commercial
contracts. Immunity would only exist when the action was taken — by
employees of suppliers or customers of the employer in dispute —
with the ‘sole or principal purpose’ of furthering the primary dispute
and when the action was reasonably likely to succeed. Of great
significance for the future was the fact that we announced the
publication of a green paper on trade union immunities, which would
appear later in the year and would look at the whole issue from a
wider perspective.
In fact, the 1980 Act did not directly affect the outcome of the steel
strike. The one action open to us which could have done so would
have been to accelerate the introduction of Clause 14 of the
Employment Bill, which made secondary picketing unlawful. I was
strongly attracted by this option. My wish to pursue it had been
greatly increased by the mass picketing which had taken place at the
private sector steel firm of Hadfields on Thursday 14 February. Keith
Joseph telephoned me at Chequers the following Sunday morning to
discuss what had happened. We had no doubt that it constituted a
grave breach of the criminal law. The question was whether the use of
the civil law, and in particular Clause 14, would make matters better
or worse.
I telephoned Willie Whitelaw, the Home Secretary, about the public
order situation and suggested that we could introduce a one-clause bill
on picketing the following week. I also spoke to Michael Havers, the
Attorney-General. It was clear to me that the police would need to

stop large numbers of pickets arriving at their destination if picketing
was to be effectively controlled and the threat of intimidation
removed. The civil law, though, could not play any part in that. There
was even an argument that a change in the civil law introduced
directly in response to violence would make it more difficult to bring
pressure on people to respect and obey the criminal law. However, I
wanted all of the possibilities to be examined urgently.
After discussion with ministers on Monday (18 February) it was
decided not to accelerate the clause relating to secondary picketing.
But instead the Attorney-General would restate the next day in the
House of Commons the criminal law as it related to picketing. Jim
Prior would also write a public letter to Len Murray, the TUC General
Secretary, drawing attention to the breach of all the traditionally
accepted and understood codes for picketing. In these ways we sought
to keep up the pressure.
THE 1980 STEEL STRIKE
The debate about trade union reform, both inside and outside
government, was conducted under the shadow of industrial conflict: in
particular, the issues of secondary action and immunities became
inextricably entangled with the 1980 steel strike. But that strike also
challenged our economic strategy directly; and it is unlikely, once the
strike had begun, that our economic policies would have survived if
we had suffered defeat.
The steel industry, like the motor vehicle industry, was suffering the
after-effects of overambitious policies of state intervention. It was Ted
Heath’s Government, of which I had been a member, which had set
BSC on course for huge investment in expanded capacity in the years
before that first oil shock which cut so many such ambitions down to
size. The following Labour Government had made some closures but,
by setting up a review under Lord Beswick in 1974–5, it had largely
sought to buy time. The greater the delay in taking remedial action,
however, the less chance there was to make proper use of the most upto-date plant and this, in turn, worsened the position of BSC as a
whole, clouding the prospect for steelmen’s jobs and increasing the
burden on the taxpayer, who had to fund huge losses.
One of my first decisions about the nationalized industries was to
agree to the closure of the Shotton steel works in North Wales.
Measures aimed at providing new job opportunities in the area would
be announced, but I knew that the closure would have a devastating
effect on the steelmen and their families. A delegation from Shotton
had come to see me when I was on a visit to Wales as Leader of the
Opposition. I felt desperately sorry for them. They had done all that
was expected. But it was not — and could not be — enough.

BSC exemplified not only the disadvantages of state ownership and
intervention, but also the way that British trade unionism dragged
down our industrial performance. A good example of what was wrong
was to be found at the Hunterston ore terminal on the Clyde. Here BSC
had built the largest deep-water jetty in Europe. It had been opened in
June 1979, but could not be used until November because of a
manning dispute between the Transport and General Workers’ Union
(TGWU) and the ISTC. For five months bulk ore carriers had to be
diverted to the Continent, where their cargo was transferred to smaller
vessels for shipment to Terminus Quay, Glasgow, and from there
finally sent on to Ravenscraig.
As the end of 1979 approached, external factors over which we had
no control made BSC’s problems rapidly worsen. There was huge
international overcapacity in steel as the world headed deeper into
recession. Steel industries almost everywhere were facing losses and
closures. But the fundamental problems of BSC were home-grown. It
took BSC nearly twice as many man-hours to produce a tonne of steel
as its major European competitors. We had reached the absurd
position that the value added by BSC was if anything a little less than
the wage bill. Over the five years to 1979–80 more than £3 billion of
public money had gone into BSC, which amounted to £221 for every
family in the country. Yet still the losses accumulated. Keith Joseph
and I were prepared to continue for the present to fund BSC’s
investment and redundancy programme; what we were not prepared
to do was to fund losses which arose from excessive wage costs,
unearned by higher productivity.
If we were serious about turning BSC round — with all the closures,
job losses, and challenges to restrictive practices that would involve —
we faced the risk of a very damaging steel strike. There was only one
worse alternative: to allow the present situation to continue.
BSC’s cash limit for 1980–81 was first set in June 1979: the aim was
for it to break even by March 1980. This objective had, in fact, been
set by the previous Labour Government. But by 29 November 1979
BSC had announced a £146 million half-year loss and abandoned its
break-even target for March, putting it back a further twelve months.
The crisis was fast approaching.
On 6 December Keith Joseph let me know what the implications
were. BSC could not afford any general wage increase from 1 January
other than the consolidation of certain additional increases agreed the
previous year — amounting to 2 per cent. Any further increase would
be dependent on local negotiations and conditional on the equivalent
improvements in productivity. The Corporation had told the unions
the week before that 5 million tonnes of surplus capacity, over and
above the closure of iron- and steel-making at Corby and Shotton,
would have to be shut down. Already Bill Sirs was threatening a strike.
I agreed with Keith that we must back the Corporation in its stand. We
also agreed that BSC must win the support of public opinion and bring

home to the unions the harm which a strike would do to their own
members.
As the strike loomed, there was much disquiet about whether the
management of BSC had properly prepared its ground for it. The
figures used to justify the management’s position were questioned,
even by Nicholas Edwards, the Secretary of State for Wales. He might
have been right. But I said that we must not attempt to substitute our
judgement as politicians for that of the industry. It was up to the
management of BSC — at last — to manage.
On 10 December the BSC Board confirmed that 52,000 steel jobs
would have to go. The business prospects for BSC were still worsening.
Indeed, when we looked at their figures for future steel demand we
thought that they were, if anything, slightly optimistic. But again,
there was no intention to set our judgement against that of the Board
and management. Even before the strike, we had been searching for a
successor to the present Chairman, Sir Charles Villiers, whose contract
was due shortly to come to an end. We had already received seven or
eight firm refusals from suitable candidates and it was clear that fear
of government interference was one of the main deterrents.
It was difficult to be sure about the outcome of the strike. BSC, the
private steel producers and the steel users all had healthy levels of
stocks. The fact that the steel users and stockholders were effectively
given three weeks’ notice of the strike allowed them to build up
stockpiles. Moreover, because of the depressed state of industry many
steel-using companies were operating well below capacity. But, on the
other hand, there would be serious problems for the users of tin plate,
and possibly for the car industry, and the situation could, of course,
rapidly worsen if dockers and transport workers took effective action
to stop steel moving around the country and to halt imports. However,
BSC and its workforce would suffer most. Its current prices were
already above those of our European competitors and the domestic
market for steel was likely to be lost permanently to foreign steel
companies which could ensure a reliable supply in the future.
From the end of December I chaired regular meetings of a small
group of ministers and officials to monitor the steel situation and
decide what action needed to be taken. It was a frustrating and
anxious time. The details of the BSC offer were not well understood
either by the steel workers or by the public. BSC did little to explain
its position. It would not put out broadsheets or buy newspaper space,
on the ground that such actions might be seen as provocative. The
hope was that other pressures could be brought to bear on the ISTC
and the National Union of Boilermakers (NUB). Moreover, in a
misguided attempt to canvass support for various pay offers which
they had made, BSC allowed a bewildering array of different figures to
gain currency, pleasing no one: to the general public the figures
always seemed to be increasing, while to the unions they never
seemed sufficient.

For its part, the ISTC was more conscious of pay settlements to other
groups of workers — the ‘going rate’ — than it was of the bleak
commercial realities of the industry in which its members worked. On
28 November Ford workers had voted to accept a 21.5 per cent wage
increase. On 5 December coal miners had accepted a 20 per cent
settlement — and been publicly praised for their moderation. All this
undoubtedly added to the strength of feeling among the steelmen. On
7 January Len Murray and Bill Sirs asked for a settlement of 8 per cent
plus 5 per cent ‘on account’ for the local productivity deals. BSC
offered 8 per cent plus 4 per cent in advance for a limited period. The
next day negotiations collapsed. The General and Municipal Workers’
Union (GMWU) joined the strike; on the following day the craftsmen
struck, and although on 10 February the craft union leaders accepted a
separate settlement of 10 per cent plus 4 per cent, later that week its
members rejected the offer. In the meantime, on 16 January, the ISTC
had spread the strike to the private steel sector, where the uncertain
legal position and the violent mass picketing added to our difficulties.
It became clear to me fairly early on, however, that the steel strike
was not going to bring British industry to a halt. At my strategy
meeting on 18 January the figures showed that the strike had so far
had little effect on industrial production, which had fallen about 2 per
cent the previous week and was perhaps marginally lower by the time
we met. Even if private steel production were suspended altogether,
there would be enough stocks to support normal manufacturing for
another four to six weeks, with problems in some particular areas
within two to three weeks. As we had foreseen, it was in the specialist
area of food canning that the greatest difficulty might arise.
It was against this background that I met first the unions at their
request and then the management of BSC on Monday 21 January at
No. 10. The union leaders had seen Keith Joseph and Jim Prior the
previous Saturday. One difficulty we had was that the unions might
have drawn the wrong impression from widely reported remarks made
by Jim, criticizing the BSC management. I had been angry to read this.
But, when a week later I was asked about it by Robin Day on
Panorama, my reply was sweetly dismissive: ‘we all make mistakes
now and then. I think it was a mistake, and Jim Prior was very, very
sorry indeed for it, and very apologetic. But you don’t just sack a chap
for one mistake.’
In my discussion with Mr Sirs and Mr Smith (the leaders
respectively of the ISTC and NUB), I said that the Government was not
going to intervene in the dispute. I did not know enough about the
steel industry to become involved in the negotiations though, of
course, I was keen to hear their views. The unions wanted the
Government to bring pressure on BSC to make an increased offer. They
wanted some ‘new money’, but I pointed out that there is no such
thing: money for the steel industry could only come from other
industries which were making a profit. The real issue, I said, was

productivity where — although Bill Sirs disputed the figures — it was
generally accepted that BSC’s performance lagged far behind.
Luxemburg had reduced its steel workforce from 24,000 to 16,000 and
substantially increased its productivity, with the result that it was now
exporting railway lines to the UK. When I had heard this the previous
autumn I had been cut to the quick, and I told him so.
That same afternoon I met Sir Charles Villiers and Bob Scholey, the
Chairman and Chief Executive of BSC. They described to me precisely
what was on offer and the very limited scope for flexibility. I gave
them my full support.
On the following day Bob Scholey and Bill Sirs held a meeting, but
to no avail. Bill Sirs continued to ask for 20 per cent, a figure which
was obviously unrealistic. The only thing we could do was see the
strike through. At my meeting of ministers and officials on 1 February
we were told that steel was still moving from the docks. There was
little or no evidence of shortages except for the deteriorating position
in Metal Box, the food can producers. The report for the week ending
2 February again showed a strong position: manufacturing production
was at 96 per cent of its normal level. On 12 February we received
clearer evidence still about how industry was coping. Ninety per cent
of steel stockholders were continuing to maintain a satisfactory level
of deliveries. Limited imports were continuing and getting past the
obstacles the unions put up against them. Not surprisingly, perhaps,
steel users were reluctant to divulge the size of their steel stocks and
potential endurance, but their morale was good. Metal Box expected to
deliver 50 per cent of what customers demanded. At British Leyland
full production could continue until the end of February.
The real problem was now arising in the private steel sector. The
mass picketing at Hadfields raised the stakes. It had overtones of the
kind of intimidation and violence which had led to the closure of the
Saltley Coke Depot during the miners’ strike in 1972: it was vital that
we win through.
British business proved resilient and resourceful in meeting the
strike: this turned out to be the decisive factor. Somehow, they got
hold of the steel they needed. In the reports presented to my meetings
the crunch point at which serious problems for steel users would arise
never seemed to come any closer. At the meeting on 4 March all
information confirmed that the strike could not succeed. The potential
endurance of steel users was being increased by the continued flow of
imported steel. If anything the outlook seemed slightly better than the
week before. By 14 March all but one of the private sector steel
companies were back in production and by the time we met on 18
March that too was working.
Although it was now obvious that the unions had lost — with the
strike clearly failing to cripple industry and the strikers themselves
increasingly demoralized — the precise terms on which the
Government and management had won remained in the balance. On 9

March BSC had held a ‘ballot about a ballot’, asking workers whether
they wanted a ballot on pay, which the ISTC had hitherto denied
them, and this had shown strong evidence of disenchantment with the
ISTC’s tactics and leadership. The union wanted a way out which
would save face. BSC had formally proposed arbitration on 17
February and, although rejected, the offer had remained open. There
was strong pressure — which I wanted to resist — for a Court of
Enquiry into the strike which would propose a settlement. I would
have preferred the involvement of ACAS (the Advisory, Conciliation
and Arbitration Service). It seemed to me that if ACAS had any reason
for existing at all, it should surely have a role in a situation such as
this. In fact, we were condemned to watch while BSC and the unions
agreed to the appointment of a three-man enquiry consisting of Lords
Lever and Marsh (both former Labour Cabinet ministers) and Bill
Keyes of SOG AT, which on 31 March recommended a settlement well
above the figure originally offered by BSC but substantially below
what the ISTC had demanded. The offer was accepted.
At its final meeting on 9 April my committee was told that all the
BSC plants were back in operation. Production and steel deliveries
were both about 95 per cent of what they would have been without
the dispute. The outcome, in spite of the size of the final settlement,
was generally seen as a victory for the Government, if not for the BSC
management.
The bills, however, kept on coming in. On 6 June Sir Charles Villiers
wrote to Keith Joseph saying that he foresaw the need for an
additional £400 million in the financial year 1980–81, over and above
the £450 million already allocated. The proposals made by BSC to stay
within the borrowing limit set by the Government (its EFL or External
Financing Limit) involved various financial devices including the sale
and lease-back of assets. The only alternative they had to suggest was
that in effect BSC should go into liquidation. Clearly, whatever the
pressures imposed by the strike, matters should never have been
allowed to come to such a pass and it reflected badly on the
management. But we had already decided what to do about that. In
spite of some outcry over the terms offered, Ian MacGregor had been
appointed to succeed Sir Charles Villiers. I expected him to deal with
the appalling commercial and financial legacy and in due course we
approved very large increases in the funding of BSC to allow him to do
this. Nor were we disappointed. Another cost, which we did not
begrudge, was the money made available to encourage new
development in areas badly affected by redundancies, such as
Llanwern, Port Talbot, Consett and Scunthorpe.
This had been a battle fought and won not simply for the
Government and for our policies, but for the economic well-being of
the country as a whole. It was necessary to stand up to unions which
thought that because they were in the public sector they should be
allowed to ignore commercial reality and the need for higher

productivity. In future, pay had to depend on the state of the
employing industry, and not on some notion of ‘comparability’ with
what other people received. But it was always going to be more
difficult to induce such realism where the state was owner, banker,
and at times tempted to be manager as well.
BRITISH LEYLAND: 1979–1980
In many ways British Leyland presented a similar challenge to the
Government as BSC, though in a still more acute and politically
difficult form. Like BSC, BL was effectively state-owned and
controlled, though technically it was not a nationalized industry. The
company had become a symbol of Britain’s industrial decline and of
trade union bloody-mindedness. However, by the time I entered No.
10 it had also begun to symbolize the fightback by management.
Michael Edwardes, BL’s Chairman, had already demonstrated his grit
in taking on the trade union militants who had brought the British car
industry to its knees. I knew that whatever we decided to do about BL
would have an impact on the psychology and morale of British
managers as a whole, and I was determined to send the right signals.
Unfortunately, unlike the case of BSC, it became increasingly clear
that the action required to support BL’s stand against trade union
obstruction diverged form what was required on purely commercoal
grounds. This was a problem: but we had to back Michael Edwardes.
We had indicated in Opposition our hostility to the Ryder Plan for
BL with its enormous cost, unmatched by sufficiently rigorous
measures to increase productivity and earn profits.* My first direct
experience as Prime Minister of BL’s difficulties came in September
1979 when Keith Joseph informed me of BL’s dreadful half-yearly
results and of the measures the Chairman and Board intended to take.
The new plan involved the closure of BL’s Coventry plant. At least
25,000 jobs would be lost. Productivity would be increased. The
development of BL’s medium car range of models would be
accelerated. The BL Board said that the Company would require
additional funds beyond the £225 million remaining of the £1 billion
which Labour, under the Ryder Plan, had in principle committed. In
response, Keith made no financial promises. He told BL to look at the
scope for raising money from its own resources — that is sales of
profitable parts of the company. There was no immediate need to take
decisions about funding until the Government received the new BL
Corporate Plan from the National Enterprise Board (NEB) in
November.
BL’s workers were to be balloted on the Corporate Plan. If it
received substantial majority support the Government would find it
very difficult to turn down and, as quickly became apparent, the
company would want a further £200 million above and beyond the
final tranche of Ryder money. The ballot, of which the result would be

announced on 1 November, seemed likely to go the company’s way.
But it might not; and that would present its own immediate problems.
For if the ballot showed anything other than overwhelming support for
the company’s proposals there would be speculation about its future,
with the prospect of BL’s many small and medium-sized creditors
demanding immediate payment and the large holders of loan stock
adding to the pressure. BL might be forced precipitately into
liquidation in circumstances which would make it impossible for us to
formulate a sensible response and for an orderly disposal of its assets
to take place. The economic implications of such a collapse were
appalling. One hundred and fifty thousand people were employed by
the company in the UK; there were perhaps an equal number of jobs in
the component and other supplying industries dependent on BL. It was
suggested that complete closure would mean a net loss to the balance
of trade of around £2,200 million a year and according to the NEB it
might cost the Government as much as £1 billion.
There was no mistaking the political and economic gravity of the
decisions required. Closure would have some awful consequences, but
we must never give the impression that it was unthinkable. If ever the
company and workforce came to believe that, there would be no limit
to their demands on the public purse. For this reason Keith and I
decided not to agree to BL’s request for the Government to issue an
undertaking to honour the company’s debt. They had wanted us to
publish a letter to this effect even before the ballot result. In fact, 87.2
per cent of those voting supported BL’s plan and BL immediately
sought approval from the NEB to go ahead with it. A firm request for
money was made to the Government.
Our consideration of the BL Corporate Plan was delayed by two
other events. First, as a result of our (unconnected) decision to remove
Rolls-Royce from the purview of the NEB, Sir Leslie Murphy and his
colleagues resigned and a new Board had to be appointed under Sir
Arthur Knight. Second, the Amalgamated Union of Engineering
Workers (AUEW) now threatened the very survival of BL by calling a
strike following the dismissal on 19 November of Derek Robinson, a
notorious agitator, convenor of the shop stewards at Longbridge and
chairman of the so-called ‘Leyland Combine Trade Union Committee’.
Robinson and others had continued to campaign against the BL plan
even after its approval. The management had been right to sack him,
pending the outcome of an inquiry by the AUEW.
On Monday 10 December ministers, under my chairmanship,
considered the Corporate Plan. The first thing I noticed was that BL’s
performance had deteriorated even since it had been drawn up. So I
asked for up-to-date forecasts of profits and cash flow. I wanted from
Michael Edwardes a proper definition of the circumstances under
which the BL Board would abandon the plan. There had to be clear
bench marks against which to measure future performance. I also
wanted to know whether Michael Edwardes himself intended to

remain as Chairman: officially, his contract had only another year to
run.
We were now, though, put under pressure to approve the plan
before the Christmas recess — without waiting for completion of BL’s
wage negotiations — in order to enable the company to sign a
collaborative deal with Honda for a new middle-range car. I was not
prepared to be bounced into a commitment. In any case, past
experience suggested to me that the plan would not in fact be fulfilled.
BL’s annual plans always forecast major improvements: but every year
things seemed to get worse. Its share of the UK market for cars had
slumped from 33 per cent in 1974 to 20 per cent in 1979, and had
fallen further, down to only 16 per cent, over the last two months. BL’s
productivity was only two-thirds that of its European competitors, and
lower still compared with the Japanese: for the company to become
competitive again productivity needed to improve by something like
50 per cent. It remained to be seen whether the Plan could transform
that. The proposed new models could help. But the first of these was
not due until the end of the following year, and by then all its
competitors would have new models too. Meanwhile, BL was already
running out of cash and would need an advance on money allocated
for the next financial year.
I, therefore, asked John Nott, who brought to the problem the
expertise and scepticism of a banker, to go over BL’s accounts with the
company’s Finance Director. Keith Joseph, John Biffen and others also
went over the plan in detail with Michael Edwardes. Their conclusion
was that there was only a small chance of BL surviving and that it was
probable that the plan would fail, followed by a run-down or
liquidation of the company. About a third of BL was thought to be
saleable. But the final judgement had to be based on wider
considerations. We reluctantly decided that people would simply not
understand liquidation of the company at the very moment when its
management was standing up to the unions and talking the language
of hard commercial common sense. And so, after much discussion, we
agreed to endorse the Plan and to provide the necessary financial
support. Keith announced our decision to the House of Commons on
20 December.
Agreeing to provide more public money was not, though, the end of
the problem: it rarely is. BL’s ballot on their pay offer went badly
wrong, partly because the question put to the workforce — ‘do you
support your Negotiating Committee’s rejection of the Company’s
wage and conditions offer?’ — was confusing. Fifty-nine per cent of
those taking part voted against the offer. Moreover, the AUEW enquiry
found that Robinson had been unfairly dismissed by the company and
an official strike was announced, to begin on 11 February. Michael
Edwardes rightly refused to reinstate him or to improve on the pay
offer. Contingency plans were made by the BL Board, assisted by
Department of Industry and Treasury officials, to cope with the

situation if the Plan had to be withdrawn and the company put into
liquidation. Michael Edwardes was unwilling, even at this stage, to
approach possible foreign buyers for a sell-off of BL, although he
agreed to respond positively to any approaches potential buyers might
make to him. Certainly, the workforce at BL could be in little doubt as
to the seriousness of their position. BL’s share of the market had fallen
so low that in January Ford sold more of one model (the Cortina) than
BL’s total sales.
Michael Edwardes and the BL Board held their nerve and faced
down the union threat. The strikers were told that unless they
returned to work by Wednesday 23 April they would be dismissed. But
much as I admired BL’s tenacity, I was becoming increasingly unhappy
about the Board’s commercial approach. In particular, there was
strong resistance from the Board to selling all or part of the company,
though this took the form of obstruction rather than declared hostility.
For example, there was fierce initial resistance to my suggestion of
engaging an independent financial adviser to advise on the disposal of
the company’s assets. It was argued that such an appointment would
undermine confidence in the company’s future. It was even suggested
that these were matters for management, not government. I could not
accept this. Government was the major shareholder in BL and it was
right that the shareholder should have a say as to when and how the
company’s assets should be sold. In fact, such an adviser was in due
course appointed, with Michael Edwardes’s acquiescence.
On Wednesday 21 May Michael Edwardes and two of his colleagues
came to a working dinner at No. 10. On the Government side, Geoffrey
Howe and Keith Joseph, Robin Ibbs the head of the CPRS, and my
private secretary were also present. Michael Edwardes said that BL
faced a worse trading environment than when the 1980 Plan was
prepared. It would be able to live within its agreed cash limit for 1980
but the £130 million limit provisionally decided for 1981 and the
assumption that no government funding would be necessary thereafter
were, he said, unrealistic. He claimed to have high hopes of
collaboration with a German manufacturer, but that the prospects for
selling most parts of the business in the near future were not
encouraging. Only Land Rover would fetch a good price at that time,
but to sell it separately would leave the rest of the business seriously
weakened. Other parts of BL might be sold in a year or two as the
recovery programme proceeded. It was obvious where all this was
leading: BL was about to present us with yet another demand for
taxpayers’ money, and probably for a huge amount.
In reply, I acknowledged that BL had achieved a great deal. But I
stressed my anxiety about the endless demands for extra money. I said
that BL had failed to meet the targets set out in its Plan. There could
be no presumption that any additional money would be provided.
As the summer wore on it became clear that the company’s financial
position was deteriorating even further. Michael Edwardes bombarded

us with complaints. He was upset about Japanese imports. He drew
attention to the (undoubtedly real) difficulties of exporting to Spain
because of that country’s high tariffs, while they nevertheless exported
their cars freely to us. He worried about the level of sterling. But none
of this could disguise the fact that things were going badly wrong at
BL and that the Board seemed unable to turn things round. The
company lost £93.4 million before interest and tax in the first halfyear compared with a profit of £47.7 million for the same period the
previous year. Michael Edwardes tried to get the Government to agree
to fund the new BL medium-range car — known as the LM10 —
separately and in advance of the 1981 Corporate Plan. Indeed, he
wanted me to announce the Government’s commitment to this at a
dinner given by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders
(SMMT) on 6 October. I had no intention of agreeing; once again, I
would not be bounced.
Instead, I delivered a rather different and possibly less welcome
message to the motor industry. I acknowledged that some of the
problems they faced were caused by the world recession. But that was
not the real reason for the industry’s difficulties. I said:
This year we have the lowest car production for twenty years. Not because
home sales are the lowest — far from it. But because people are buying
foreign cars rather than our own. And some of those come from high-wage,
high-exchange-rate economies. The world recession may have exacerbated
our problems, but it is not the root cause in the motor industry. What has
happened to the motor industry since the 1950s exemplifies what has been
going wrong in too many other parts of British industry: higher pay not
matched by higher productivity; low profits, so low investment; too little
going into R & D and new design … and why haven’t we had the
productivity? Overmanning. Resistance to change. Too many strikes and
stoppages.

The last part of that message seemed to fall on deaf ears. On 27
October BL’s trade unions decided overwhelmingly to reject the
company’s offer of a pay increase of 6.8 per cent and recommended a
strike. Michael Edwardes wrote to Keith Joseph to say that a strike
would make it impossible to achieve the 1981 Corporate Plan
submitted just a week before. To win support for the pay offer, he
wanted to write to inform union officials of the key aspects of the
1981 Plan, including the funds required for 1981 and 1982 — a figure
which he would put at £800 million. I reluctantly accepted Michael
Edwardes’s approach but only on the clear understanding that the
Department of Industry would make it known that the Government
was not committed in any way to finding these funds and that the
matter had yet to be considered. In fact, on 18 November BL’s union
representatives backed down and finally decided to accept the
company’s offer. History repeated itself: almost the same thing had
happened the previous year. The need to deal with an industrial
relations crisis made it extremely difficult to avoid the impression that
we were prepared to provide large amounts of extra public funding for

the company. No matter how clear our disclaimers, inevitably people
drew that conclusion.
On any rational commercial judgement, there were no good reasons
for continuing to fund British Leyland. The 1980 Corporate Plan had
foreseen the need for about £130 million of new government equity in
the period of 1981 and beyond. In the 1981 Plan which we were now
asked to approve that sum had grown by £1 billion. Meanwhile, the
outlook for profits was worse. The predictions for market share in
successive Plans had grown ever gloomier. Many of BL’s models were
uncompetitive. The Metro and the BL/Honda Bounty would help, but
neither would yield much in profits. BL was still a high-cost, lowvolume manufacturer of cars in a world where low cost and high
volume were essential for success.
On 12 January I held a meeting at No. 10 to discuss the Corporate
Plan with Keith Joseph, Geoffrey Howe, Norman Tebbit and others. I
continued to argue that we should try to find some middle way
between total closure and fully funding the Corporate Plan.
I knew that closure of the volume car business, with all that would
mean for the West Midlands and the Oxford area, would not be
politically acceptable to the Cabinet or the Party, at least in the short
term. It would also be a huge cost to the Exchequer — perhaps not
very different to the sort of sums BL was now seeking. I told a meeting
of ministers on 16 January that the Government must get rid of its
financial liability for the volume car business in a way which was both
humane and politically acceptable. We might need to pay a ‘dowry’ to
make the car business attractive to a buyer: ultimately, of course, it
might mean closure — the market, not government, would ultimately
determine BL’s future. I said that I was in favour of supporting the BL
Plan — but on condition that BL disposed of its assets rapidly or
arranged mergers with other companies.
This last point was still extremely contentious. Michael Edwardes
told Geoffrey Howe and Keith Joseph that the BL Board would be
willing to sell Land Rover and such other parts of the business as they
could and close down the volume car business: but they were not
willing to sell Land Rover if they were also required to go on trying to
salvage the volume car business. He said that the Board’s position
would be quite impossible if a public deadline were to be set for its
sale.
This attitude, of course, put us in a very difficult position — as it
was doubtless intended to do. It irritated one or two ministers to the
point of turning them against the whole Plan. Moreover, it had not
been possible for us to find the ‘middle way’ which I had sought and
which would have involved progressive sale of the business without a
total and immediate shut-down. But the political realities had to be
faced. BL had to be supported. We agreed to accept BL’s Corporate
Plan, involving the division of the company into four more or less
independent businesses. We settled the contingencies which would

lead to the Plan being abandoned. We set out the objectives for further
collaboration with other companies. And — most painfully — we
provided £990 million.
This was not, of course, the end of the story for BL, any more than it
was for BSC. In due course, it would be shown that the changes in
attitude and improvements in efficiency achieved in these years were
permanent.* To that extent, the account of our policy in 1979–81
towards BL is one of success — at a cost. But the huge extra sums of
public money that we were forced to provide came from the taxpayer
or, through higher interest rates needed to finance extra borrowing,
from other businesses. And every vociferous cheer for higher public
spending was matched by a silent groan from those who had to pay for
it.
These were areas, typically around 500 acres in size, within which major tax
incentives were made available to business — 100 per cent capital allowances for
industrial and commercial buildings, complete relief from development land tax,
exemption from local taxation, drastically simplified planning control and lighter
regulation. The idea was Geoffrey’s own brainchild.
*

Notes and coins are included in all the monetary measures. But since the great
majority of transactions in the economy are not conducted in cash, but in transferring
claims on the banking system (e.g., writing cheques), most measures also include some
part of total bank deposits. Wider measures often include the deposits of other
financial institutions such as building societies. £M3 comprises notes and coins in
circulation with the public, together with all sterling deposits (including certificates of
deposit) held by UK residents in both public and private sectors. The argument about
which is the best measure continues, though a misplaced obsession with the exchange
rate has since rather put such argument into the shade. There were two important
points which were forgotten by many of those who criticized the MTFS on the basis of
the changes we made. First, ‘monetarism’ is simply the view that inflation is a
monetary phenomenon and that, therefore, the reduction in the rate of growth of the
money stock is essential to achieving a permanent reduction in inflation. Second, there
is a difference between the measurement and the control of the money supply. Our
difficulty was to measure the money supply, which led to our seeking different or
better measures to supplement £M3. We knew how to control the money supply,
through interest rates, and did so: indeed Alan Walters was to argue persuasively that
we had controlled it too much.
*

*

See below, pp. 102–4, 107.

The report was damning. SLADE had been using its strength in the printing industry
to recruit among freelance artists, photographic studios and advertising agencies by
threatening to ‘black’ the printing of their work unless they joined the union. The
report concluded that the campaign ‘was conducted without any regard whatever to
the feelings, interests, or welfare of the prospective recruits’.
*

The Ryder Plan, dating from 1975, proposed the investment by government in phases
over seven years of £1.4 billion to modernize BL plant and introduce new models.
*
*

See pp. 679–80.

CHAPTER V

Not for Turning
Politics and the economy in 1980–1981

NO U-TURNS
At 2.30 on the afternoon of Friday 10 October 1980 I rose to address
the Conservative Party Conference in Brighton. Unemployment stood
at over two million and rising; a deepening recession lay ahead;
inflation was far higher than we had inherited, though falling; and we
were at the end of a summer of government leaks and rifts. The Party
was worried, and so was I. Our strategy was the right one, but the
price of putting it into effect was proving so high, and there was such
limited understanding of what we were trying to do, that we had great
electoral difficulties. However, I was utterly convinced of one thing:
there was no chance of achieving that fundamental change of attitudes
which was required to wrench Britain out of decline if people believed
that we were prepared to alter course under pressure. I made the point
with a line provided by Ronnie Millar:
To those waiting with bated breath for that favourite media catchphrase, the
‘U-turn’, I have only one thing to say. ‘You turn if you want to. The lady’s
not for turning.’ I say that not only to you, but to our friends overseas — and
also to those who are not our friends.

The message was directed as much to some of my colleagues in the
Government as it was to politicians of other parties. It was in the
summer of 1980 that my critics within the Cabinet first seriously
attempted to frustrate the strategy which we had been elected to carry
out — an attack which reached its climax and was defeated the
following year. At the time that I spoke, many people felt that this
group had more or less prevailed.
ARGUMENTS ABOUT PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE
Battle was to be joined over the next two years on three related issues:
monetary policy, public spending and trade union reform. The ‘wets’
argued that because we had embraced a dogmatic monetary theory
that inflation could only be brought down by a fierce monetary
squeeze, we were squeezing the economy in the middle of a recession.
Such dogmatism, they argued, similary prevented our using practical
tools of economic policy like prices and incomes control and forced us
to cut public spending when, as Keynes had argued, public spending

should be increased to lift an economy suffering from lack of demand.
The most bitter Cabinet arguments were over public spending. In
most cases those who dissented from the line which Geoffrey Howe
and I took were not merely intent on opposing our whole economic
strategy as doctrinaire monetarism; they were trying to protect their
departmental budgets. It had soon become clear that the public
expenditure plans announced in March 1980 had been far too
optimistic. In particular, the large turn round from losses towards
profitability in the nationalized industries was not going to come
about; local authorities, as usual, were overspending; and the recession
was proving deeper than expected, increasing spending on
unemployment and other benefits. Government borrowing for the first
quarter of 1980 looked like being very large. In addition, Francis Pym,
Defence Secretary, was pressing for an increase in the Ministry of
Defence (MoD) cash limit.
We had decided to have a general economic discussion in Cabinet
on 3 July 1980, before our first collective discussion of the 1981–2
public expenditure round on 10 July. Our aim was to confront
spending ministers with the full implications for taxation of a failure
to control spending, and to smoke out the arguments for reflation,
which were almost daily to be found in the newspapers and in the
mouths of pressure groups. But I had no illusions that it would be easy
to subject my colleagues’ aspirations to a salutary dose of realism.
Geoffrey spelt out to Cabinet how difficult the economic situation at
home and abroad had now become. Inflation in the major economies
had risen sharply, oil prices had doubled, and the world was moving
further into recession — led in this direction by Jimmy Carter’s United
States. Although output in the UK had fallen rather less than predicted
in 1980, it was likely in consequence to fall faster than expected in
1981. Inflation was slowing, but less rapidly than we had hoped. The
background to the public spending round and to next year’s budget
was, therefore, bleak. Then the discussion began. Some ministers
argued for large increases in spending to stave off unemployment;
others argued for prudence. I summed up by reaffirming the present
strategy and noting the need to maintain public spending constraints,
to reduce public sector pay increases and so to allow government
borrowing and interest rates to fall — although within spending totals
I was keen to see a higher priority given to dealing with
unemployment, especially among young people. Round one went to
Geoffrey and me.
But the debate continued inside and outside government. The “wets”
arguments came in different forms of varying sophistication, though
their central message was always the same: spend and borrow more.
They used to argue that we needed extra public spending on
employment and industrial schemes, over and above what we had
planned and were effectively forced to spend simply as a result of the
recession. But this did not escape from the fact that extra public

spending — whatever it was spent on — had to come from
somewhere. And ‘somewhere’ meant either taxes levied on private
individuals and industry; or borrowing, pushing up interest rates; or
printing money, setting off inflation. There was also a feeling, which I
equally knew I had to resist, that the refunds which I had secured from
the European Community budget should be used to finance extra
spending. But why should it be assumed that public spending was
better than private spending? Why should the fruits of my efforts to
rein in the appetite of the European Community automatically be
consumed by an almost as insatiable British public sector? I was,
therefore, determined to ensure that the Cabinet endorsed the 1981–2
public expenditure total announced in the previous white paper, as
reduced by the European budget receipts.
These basic differences between us came out clearly at the public
spending Cabinet on 10 July. Some ministers argued that the PSBR
should be allowed to increase to accommodate the huge new
requirements of the loss-making nationalized industries. But the PSBR
was already far too high, whatever the theoretical merits or otherwise
of letting public borrowing rise in a recession. The higher it went, the
greater the pressure to raise interest rates in order to persuade people
to lend the Government the necessary funds. And at a certain point —
if pushed too far — there would be the risk of a full-scale government
funding crisis — that is, when you cannot finance your borrowing
from the non-banking sector. We could not risk going further in that
direction. So I emphasized once again the need to stay within the
public spending plans — though within them there could be more
priority given to assistance for jobs.
The defence budget was a special problem. We had already accepted
the NATO commitment for annual 3 per cent real increases in our
defence spending. This had the obvious merit of demonstrating to the
Soviets our determination to prevent their winning the arms race on
which they had embarked, but in two other respects it was
unsatisfactory. First, it meant that the MoD had little incentive to get
value for money in the hugely expensive equipment it purchased.
Second, the 3 per cent commitment meant that Britain, spending a
substantially higher proportion of its GDP on defence than other
European countries and going through a peculiarly deep recession,
found herself bearing an unfair and increasing burden. There were also
problems relating to management of the MoD budget. By the end of
1980 the MoD had overspent its cash limit because, with the depressed
state of industry, suppliers had fulfilled government orders faster than
expected.
As we moved into the winter of 1980 the economic difficulties
accumulated and the political pressure built up. It might have been
easier to gain support in the battle for tight control of public spending
if the second element of the strategy — the money supply — had been
behaving predictably. But it had not. On Wednesday 3 September

Geoffrey Howe and I met to discuss the monetary position. What did
the figures really mean? Measured in terms of £M3, the money supply
had been rising much faster than the target we had set in the MTFS at
the time of the March budget. It was hard to know how much of this
was the result of our removing exchange controls in 1979 and our
decision in June to remove the ‘corset’ — a device by which the Bank
of England imposed limits on bank lending. Money analysts argued
that both of these liberalizations had misleadingly bloated the £M3
figures.* As I put it to Brian Waiden in an interview on Sunday 1
February:
a corset is there to conceal the underlying bulges, not to deal with them, and
when you take it off you might see that the bulges are worse.

By contrast, some of the other monetary measures were
undershooting their targets. The ‘wets’ found the wayward behaviour
of £M3 a suitable subject for mockery at dinner parties. But for
Geoffrey and me it was no such diversion. The arguments about which
was the most accurate measure of the money supply were highly
technical, but they were of great significance.
Of course, we never just looked at monetary figures to gauge what
was happening. We also looked at the real world around us. And what
we saw told a somewhat different tale from the high £M3 figures.
Inflation had slowed down markedly, particularly prices in the shops
where competition was intense. Sterling was very strong, averaging
just below $2.40 during the second half of 1980. And here the crucial
issue was whether the high exchange rate was more or less an
independent factor bringing down inflation, or rather a result of the
monetary squeeze being tighter than we intended and than the £M3
figures suggested.
Some of my closest advisers thought the latter. Professor Douglas
Hague sent me a paper in which he described our policies as ‘lopsided’
in two respects: first, they were bearing down more heavily on the
private than the public sector (which I knew to be true), and second,
they were putting too much emphasis on controlling the money supply
and too little on controlling the PSBR, with the result that interest
rates were higher than they should have been. (I also came to share
this view over the next year.) In the summer of 1980 I consulted Alan
Walters, who was to join me at the beginning of 1981 as my economic
policy adviser at No. 10 and upon whose judgement I came more and
more to rely. Alan’s view was that the monetary squeeze was too tight
and that it was the narrowest definition of ‘money’, known as the
monetary base, which was the best, indeed the only reliable, star to
steer by. Certainly, during the autumn of 1980 the narrowest
definitions of money suggested that we were pursuing a very severe
monetary policy.
If there was uncertainty about the monetary position at this time,
there was none at all about the trend in public spending, which was

inexorably upwards. Public sector pay was one of the worst problems:
the bills we received were largely the legacy of Labour’s failed
incomes policy, but they had to be paid all the same, and they set a
higher base for future settlements as well. The other main culprit for
the enormous increase in public spending was, as I have said, the
nationalized industries. Looking at the disappointing figures emerging
from the public expenditure round, I wrote at the time that they ‘had
undermined the Government’s whole public expenditure strategy’. But
there was worse to come.
In September, Geoffrey Howe sent me a note elaborating on the
warning he had already given to Cabinet about public expenditure.
The increases required for the nationalized industries, particularly
BSC, would require larger cuts in programmes than those agreed in
July in order to hold the total. To the extent that more was provided,
as the Cabinet wished, for industrial support and employment, the
corresponding cuts would need to be larger still. The fifth public
expenditure round in sixteen months was bound to prompt squeals of
indignation: and so it proved.
Indeed, a further note from Geoffrey in early October confirmed that
the position was, if anything, deteriorating: the figures were worse
than suggested the previous month. The latest forecast of the PSBR for
1981–2 approached £11 billion, far higher than planned. The Treasury
had already begun to examine ways in which it might be reduced and
were looking at the possibility of increasing taxes on the profits from
North Sea oil and gas, raising employees’ national insurance
contributions and not fully indexing personal income tax allowances in
line with inflation. All of these unpalatable tax options reinforced the
necessity for further public spending cuts: we needed a cash limits
squeeze on all programmes and a cut in local authority current
spending, and we would have to look again at defence spending and at
the even more politically sensitive social security budget. (The social
security budget accounted for a quarter of total public spending, of
which the cost of retirement pensions was by far the largest element.
But I had pledged publicly that the latter would be raised in line with
inflation during the Parliament.) We were entering perilous waters.
The tactics in handling the new public expenditure discussions were
obviously very important. Geoffrey and I decided not to take the
whole matter to Cabinet cold, as it were, so I called a meeting of key
ministers to go into it first. The Chancellor described the position and
outlined the arithmetic.
Our plan succeeded. Without too much grumbling, the Cabinet of 30
October endorsed the strategy and confirmed our objective of keeping
public spending in 1981–2 and later years broadly at the levels set out
in the March white paper. This meant that it would be necessary to
make cuts of the order of magnitude proposed by the Treasury —
though even with these reductions we would be forced to increase
taxes if we were to bring the PSBR down to a level compatible with

lower interest rates.
Much stronger Cabinet opposition surfaced when we began to look
at the decisions required to give effect to the strategy which had been
endorsed. The ‘wets’ now discovered a new approach. They claimed
that they lacked sufficient information to judge whether the overall
strategy was soundly based. Without this, they said, they were in no
position to weigh the economic, political and social consequences of
all the various means of achieving it, including changes in taxation
and reductions in public spending. The ploy was transparent. In effect,
spending ministers were trying to behave as if they were Chancellors
of the Exchequer. It would be a recipe for complete absence of
spending control and thus for economic chaos.

The three most important areas of discussion at our meeting on
Tuesday 4 November were the Health Service and defence budgets,
and the special employment measures which Jim Prior wanted. On
Health, we decided that the NHS element in the National Insurance
Contribution should be raised rather than the health programme itself
reduced — so continuing to honour our manifesto pledge. On defence,
the Cabinet accepted that the reductions would have to fall
somewhere between what the Treasury demanded and the MoD was
then offering. Finally, we agreed on the special employment measures,
which I later announced in my speech on the Address, and which
provided for 440,000 places on the Youth Opportunities Programme
— 180,000 more than in the current year.
Two days later, Cabinet met again to continue the discussion. The
financial position of the nationalized industries had worsened even in
the short time since we had begun our spending review. Public sector
pay was still a headache. If we managed to hold future public service
pay increases to 6 per cent, as we wished, we could still expect a PSBR
of £12 billion in 1981–2, compared with the £7.5 billion implied by
the MTFS. It would not be possible to finance a PSBR of this size and
reduce interest rates at the same time. Therefore, in order to avoid
high interest rates substantial tax increases would be needed. In my
summing up I noted that the position would be still worse, if
reductions still under discussion — including defence, social security
and education — were not actually agreed. In fact, Cabinet made the
final decisions about the package the following week.
The Autumn Statement on 24 November 1980, therefore, contained
some highly unpopular measures. Employees’ National Insurance
Contributions had to go up. Retirement pensions and other social
security benefits would be increased by 1 per cent less than the rate of
inflation next year if they turned out to have risen by 1 per cent more
in the present year. There were cuts in defence and local government
spending. It was announced that a new supplementary tax would be
introduced on North Sea oil profits. However, there was some good
news: the further employment measures — and a 2 percentage point
cut in MLR.

DISSENT BY LEAKS
Few members of the public are experts in the finer matters of
economics — though most have a shrewd sense when promises do not
add up. By the end of 1980 I began to feel that we risked forfeiting the
public’s confidence in our economic strategy. Unpopularity I could live
with. But loss of confidence in our capacity to deliver our economic
programme was far more dangerous. We were now spending more
when we believed in spending less; inflation was high when we
proclaimed the primacy of bringing it down; and private industry was
faltering when we had been saying for years that only successful free
enterprise could make a country wealthy. Of course, we could point to
factors over which we had little or no control, and above all to the
world recession; and on inflation and pay settlements there was
movement in the right direction. But our credibility was at stake. And
the very last thing I could afford was well-publicized dissent from
within the Cabinet itself. Yet this was what I now had to face.
Public dissent from the ‘wets’ was phrased in what was obviously
intended to be a highly sophisticated code, in which each phrase had a
half-hidden meaning and philosophical abstractions were woven
together to condemn practical policies by innuendo. This cloaked and
indirect approach has never been my style and I felt contempt for it. I
thrive on honest argument. I am interested in practical options. And I
prefer to debate my opponents rather than to undermine them with
leaks. I do not believe that collective responsibility is an interesting
fiction, but a point of principle. My experience is that a number of the
men I have dealt with in politics demonstrate precisely those
characteristics which they attribute to women — vanity and an
inability to make tough decisions. There are also certain kinds of men
who simply cannot abide working for a woman. They are quite
prepared to make every allowance for ‘the weaker sex’: but if a woman
asks no special privileges and expects to be judged solely by what she
is and does, this is found gravely and unforgivably disorienting. Of
course, in the eyes of the ‘wet’ Tory establishment I was not only a
woman, but ‘that woman’, someone not just of a different sex, but of a
different class, a person with an alarming conviction that the values
and virtues of middle England should be brought to bear on the
problems which the establishment consensus had created. I offended
on many counts.
The economic and public expenditure discussions of 1980
repeatedly found their way into the press; decisions came to be seen as
victories by one side or the other and Bernard Ingham told me that it
was proving quite impossible to convey a sense of unity and purpose
in this climate. During 1980 the public was treated to a series of
speeches and lectures by Ian Gilmour and Norman St John Stevas on
the shortcomings of monetarism, which, according to them, was

deeply un-Tory, a kind of alien dogma — though they usually took
care to cover themselves against charges of disloyalty by including
some fulsome remarks praising me and the Government’s approach.
Speaking in Cambridge in November, Ian Gilmour claimed that Britain
risked ‘the creation of a “Clockwork Orange” society with all its
attendant alienation and misery’, which sounded remarkably like
Britain in the ‘winter of discontent’.
Industrial leaders helped worsen the general impression of disarray:
in the same month the new Director-General of the CBI was promising
‘a bare knuckle fight’ over Government policies, though when I met
the CBI shortly afterwards I am glad to say that knuckles were not in
evidence. Then in December Jim Prior was reported as urging us not
to use the language of the ‘academic seminar’. But perhaps the most
astonishing remark — not his last — was John Biffen’s widely reported
admission to the Conservative Party Parliamentary Finance Committee
that he did not share the enthusiasm for the MTFS, which he — the
Chief Secretary to the Treasury — was trying, with singularly little
success, to apply in the field of public expenditure. Not surprisingly,
when I met the executive of the ‘22 Committee later that month I
found that they had a low view of ministerial efforts at presentation. I
most certainly agreed. But it was not simply a question of
presentation: some ministers were trying to discredit the strategy
itself. This could not be allowed to continue.
I had the Christmas holiday to consider what should be done. I
decided that it was time to reshuffle the Cabinet. The only question
was whether a limited reshuffle would serve to change the balance
sufficiently in favour of our economic strategy, or whether much more
far-reaching changes were required. I decided on the former.
On Monday 5 January I made the changes, beginning with Norman
St John Stevas, who left the Government. I was sorry to lose Norman
but he made his own departure inevitable. He had a first-class brain
and a ready wit. But he turned indiscretion into a political principle.
His jokes at the expense of government policy moved smoothly from
private conversation to Commons gossip to the front page of
newspapers. The other departure, Angus Maude, had employed his
own sharp wit in my support but he felt that it was time to give up the
job as Paymaster-General, in charge of government information, in
order to return to writing. I moved John Nott to Defence to replace
Francis Pym. I was convinced that someone with real understanding of
finance and a commitment to efficiency was needed in this
department. I moved John Biffen to replace John Nott at Trade, and at
Geoffrey Howe’s request appointed Leon Brittan as Chief Secretary.
Leon Brittan was a close friend of Geoffrey’s. He was enormously
intelligent and hard-working and he had impressed me with the
sharpness of his mind, particularly in Opposition when he had been
one of the Party’s spokesmen on the then vexed issue of Devolution.
Two very talented new Ministers of State came into the Department of

Industry to support Keith Joseph: Norman Tebbit and Kenneth Baker.
Norman had worked closely with me in Opposition. I knew that he
was totally committed to our policies, shared much of my own outlook
and was a devastating Commons in-fighter. Ken was given special
responsibility for Information Technology, a task in which he showed
his talents as a brilliant presenter of policy. Francis Pym took over the
task of disseminating government information, which he combined
with the position of Leader of the House of Commons. But the first half
of this appointment was to prove a source of some difficulty in the
months ahead.
With this moderate Cabinet reshuffle, I had hoped that we would be
able to face our economic difficulties with greater unity and
determination. Certainly, both qualities were needed: the criticisms of
our strategy were mounting. I counter-attacked. Both in my Weekend
World interview on 1 February and a few days later in my speech in
the Commons economic debate I replied to the arguments of those
who believed that the real problem in Britain was lack of economic
demand and who argued that we should remedy it by reflation. I told
the House:
As governments tried to stimulate employment by pumping money into the
economy they caused inflation. The inflation led to higher costs. The higher
costs meant loss of ability to compete. The few jobs that we had gained were
soon lost; and so were a lot more with them. And then, from a higher level of
unemployment and inflation, the process was started all over again, and each
time around both inflation and unemployment rose.

But the other side had important allies in the media. A leading
article in the Sunday Times, usually a Conservative paper, carried the
headline ‘Wrong, Mrs Thatcher, Wrong, Wrong, Wrong’. Indeed, the
press was full of hostile comment. And that hit the morale of my
supporters. On 27 February I received a memorandum from Ian Gow:
Prime Minister
1. I am sorry to say that there has been a noticeable deterioration in the
morale of our back-benchers.
2. I attribute this to:(a) Increasing concern about the extent of the recession and
unemployment.

(b) The perceived defeats for the Government on Coal and, to a lesser
extent, in the pay settlement for the water workers.
(c) The size of the PSBR and the slowness with which interest rates are
falling.
(d) The insatiable appetite of the Public Sector — notably BL, BSC, NCB.
(e) The Rate Support Grant.

Many of the critics inside and outside the Conservative Party felt
that they had detected weakness, were determined to exploit it and
saw their chance coming with the 1981 budget.

THE 1981 BUDGET
I shall never forget the weeks leading up to the 1981 budget. Hardly a
day seemed to go by without the financial scene deteriorating in some
way. At the end of January Geoffrey Howe was still hoping to make
serious cuts in capital taxation and to provide substantial assistance
for industry, but by the beginning of February the Treasury was
already becoming more cautious and pessimistic about the outlook.
The PSBR for the current year seemed likely to turn out between £4
and £6 billion more than the figure forecast in the 1980 budget. The
current Treasury forecast, which assumed indexation of personal tax
allowances and of specific duties and took account of the measures
announced in November 1980, showed a PSBR for 1981–2 in the
region of £11 billion (nearly 4.5 per cent of GDP), compared with a
figure implied by the MTFS of around £7.5 billion (some 3 per cent of
GDP). At this point the Treasury believed that we should aim for a
PSBR somewhat below £10 billion. There was, therefore, a gap of £1
billion to £1.5 billion.
Personal incomes had been increasing while company profits had
been shrinking, so it was clear that any extra taxation should be borne
by the personal rather than the corporate sector. The Treasury were
talking of raising personal allowances by a minimum of 6.5 per cent —
they hoped for 9 or 10 per cent — rather than the full 1.5 per cent
required to take account of inflation. They were planning to raise the
specific duties on alcohol, tobacco and petrol by one and threequarters or perhaps twice the rate necessary to take account of
inflation. Business — especially the CBI — was pressing hard for a
reduction in the National Insurance Surcharge (NIS), but there were
problems with this proposal: the full year cost of each percentage
point reduction was very large, the relief was indiscriminate and there
was the risk that some of it might go quickly into wages. Other
possible ways of helping industry — each of which had its own
disadvantages — included a cut in Corporation Tax or in the Heavy
Fuel Oil Duty. We had in November announced extra taxation on
North Sea oil and gas profits. The question now was whether to levy a
windfall tax on bank profits. Naturally, the banks strongly opposed
this; but the fact remained that they had made their large profits as a
result of our policy of high interest rates rather than because of
increased efficiency or better service to the customer.
Yet these were essentially secondary issues — and on larger issues
there were legitimate disagreements inside the ‘dry’ section of the
Government. The main problem was to determine how tight the fiscal
stance of the budget should be and the monetary policy which it
would be supporting. On this question Alan Walters, who had now
joined me at No. 10, had his own strong views. He argued for a larger
cut in the PSBR than Geoffrey Howe was proposing. He also believed

that the way in which the monetary policy was conducted was
defective. But the Treasury were not prepared to move to the system
of monetary base control which Alan favoured and to which I was
attracted by his clear and persuasive analysis.
And this was much more than a technical disagreement. Alan
Walters, John Hoskyns and Alfred Sherman had suggested that
Professor Jurg Niehans, a distinguished Swiss monetary economist,
should prepare a study on our monetary policy for me. Professor
Niehans’s report which I read in early February, though framed in
highly technical language, had a clear message. It was that North Sea
oil had probably not been a major factor in sterling’s appreciation;
rather, tight monetary policy had caused the pound to rise so high,
imposing such pressure on British industry and deepening the
recession. The report argued that we should use the monetary base
rather than £M3 as the main monetary measure and suggested that we
should allow it to rise in the first half of 1981. In short, Professor
Niehans thought monetary policy was too tight and should quickly be
loosened. Alan emphatically agreed with him.
My doubts at this time about the Treasury’s conduct of monetary
policy, however, were more than matched by the concern I felt at the
steady growth in its estimates of the PSBR — the target by which we
steered our fiscal policy. On 10 February 1981 Geoffrey Howe and I
met to discuss the budget strategy. Geoffrey now told me that the
forecast for the PSBR had been updated and showed not £11 billion
but £13 billion. He was now talking about raising income tax
allowances by only 6 per cent rather than the 10 per cent he had
earlier envisaged — though he still wanted a substantial enterprise
package. I told him that our primary concern must be to boost
industry and that this meant giving priority to a reduction in interest
rates, which would also help get down the exchange rate. If there were
to be a choice between cutting the NIS and a lower PSBR I preferred
the latter.
I was worried by the prospect of a 2 per cent addition to the RPI as
a result of the indirect tax increases which were being proposed. I was
sure it would be better to achieve further public expenditure cuts. But
I had to agree that the chance of achieving these, given Cabinet
attitudes, was very slim indeed.
At this meeting Alan Walters continued to press the view that we
should allow the monetary base to grow more quickly. We also
discussed the timing of any interest rate cuts which we would be able
to make.
The starkness of the choices before us was now becoming clear.
Later that day Alan sent me a note which summed up the problem
with the PSBR. We were confronted with rapid and huge changes in
the figures which made the strategic planning of the budget very
difficult. But one thing was clear. The trend of PSBR forecasts was
upwards. The likelihood was that we would budget for too low a

reduction in the PSBR, as we had in 1980–81. To repeat that mistake
would either force us to introduce an additional budget in late summer
or autumn, or put great strains on the funding of government
borrowing. In the last resort it might lead to a funding crisis, and it
would certainly force us to increase interest rates, keeping sterling
high and increasing the already severe squeeze on the private sector.
We had to avoid such an outcome. We might still get things right in
time — but only if we made painful decisions now, and presented
them effectively, as the only possible response to the costs of the last
wage round and nationalized industry losses. What we needed was a
budget for employment.
On Friday 13 February I had a further meeting with Geoffrey Howe.
Alan Walters was also present. The latest forecast for the PSBR was
between £13.5 billion and £13.75 billion. The tax increases Geoffrey
was proposing would reduce it to something between £11.25 billion
and £11.5 billion, but he did not believe it was politically possible to
go below £11 billion, and in his view an increase in the basic tax rate
had to be ruled out. But Alan argued strongly that the PSBR should be
lower still. He told us that a PSBR of, say, £10 billion would be no
more deflationary than one of £11 billion because the latter would
actually be worse for City expectations and for interest rates. Alan
concluded by arguing that we had no alternative but to raise the basic
rates of income tax by 1 or 2 per cent.
Alan was the economist. But Geoffrey and I were politicians.
Geoffrey rightly observed that introducing what would be represented
as a deflationary budget at the time of the deepest recession since the
1930s would be difficult enough; doing so via an increase in the basic
rate would make it a political nightmare. I went along with Geoffrey’s
judgement about the problems of raising income tax, but I did so
without much conviction and as the days went by my unease grew.

When Geoffrey and I had our next budget meeting on 17 February,
he said that he too had been having second thoughts. He was now
prepared to contemplate a basic rate increase. But his concern was
whether it might not be better to raise the basic rate of income tax by
1 per cent and personal allowances by about 10 per cent, thus
reducing the burden on people below average earnings. I confirmed
that I in turn was prepared to contemplate this, but I also told him that
I was coming to the view that it was essential to get the PSBR below
£11 billion.
My advisers — Alan Walters, John Hoskyns and David Wolfson —
continued to argue for this much lower PSBR with great passion. Keith
Joseph also strongly backed this view. Alan, who knew that he could
always have access to me more or less when he wished — as in my
view any really close adviser should if a prime minister is not to be the
prisoner of his (or her) in-tray — came in to my study to have one last
attempt to get me to change my mind about the budget. He ran over
again the reasons why we could never have lower interest rates —

which was what the economy desperately needed — unless we had
lower borrowing, which now meant higher taxes. I know today that he
went away still believing that I was not persuaded. But the more I
wrestled with the problem in my mind, the more accurate his analysis
seemed. The budget he was arguing for would be unpopular with the
public, mystifying to many of my strongest supporters in the Commons
and the country and incomprehensible to those economists still stuck
in post-war Keynesian orthodoxy. Its consequences for my
administration were unpredictable. Yet I knew in my heart of hearts
that there was only one right decision, and that it now had to be
made.
Geoffrey Howe and I — without Alan who was engaged on some
other business but with Douglas Wass, the Treasury’s Permanent
Secretary — met for a further discussion of the budget on the
afternoon of Tuesday 24 February. Geoffrey still envisaged a PSBR for
1981–2 of £11.25 billion. I said that I was dismayed by such a figure
and that I doubted whether it would be possible to cut interest rates,
which we badly needed to do, unless government borrowing was
reduced to a figure around £10.5 billion. I said that I was even
prepared to accept a penny on the standard rate. In the light of all the
taxpayers’ money which had gone to coal and steel there would at
least be a clear explanation for this.
Geoffrey argued against a penny on income tax — on which I was
not too difficult to persuade for I was horrified at the thought of
reversing even some of the progress we had made on bringing down
Labour’s tax rates. But he also argued against the need to bring down
the PSBR further, and on this last point I was not persuaded at all. We
had further inconclusive discussion about alternative ways to raise tax.
Time was growing very short. Geoffrey was still prepared to hope for
the best as regards the effect of an £11.25 billion PSBR figure on
interest rates. But he knew that I just could not accept this. He went
away to think further about what should be done.
Early the following morning, Alan came in to see me when I was in
the flat packing my hats into boxes for my trip to the United States
that afternoon. I told him that I had insisted on the lower PSBR he
wanted. But I still did not know quite how Geoffrey would react. Then
shortly before I left for America Geoffrey came in to see me. Having
consulted his ministerial colleagues in the Treasury that morning he
had accepted that we should have a smaller PSBR, below £11 billion.
Rather than increase the basic rate of income tax he proposed the less
unpopular course of withholding any increase in tax thresholds —
though this was still an extraordinarily bold move when inflation
remained at 13 per cent. This was the turning point. I was glad that
Geoffrey had accepted the argument and I was pleased that he had
found a way of increasing tax revenues that did not run counter to our
long-term strategy of reversing Labour’s high tax rates. Our budget
strategy was now set. And it looked as if we would be able to

announce a reduction of 2 per cent in MLR in the budget the following
Tuesday.
There was one other change announced in the budget, apparently
technical but of great significance: the change to planning public
expenditure in cash rather than what were called ‘volume’ terms. Each
minister would be given a cash budget within which to keep his
expenditure. Since the spring of 1980 we had been considering how
this should be done and I discussed it with Geoffrey Howe and others
in the Treasury over lunch there on 28 January 1981. It would have
seemed distinctly odd to any company finance director, or housewife
for that matter, how the government in those days used to work out its
annual expenditure. The Chancellor would make his assessment of
government revenue in cash, but spending decisions were made in
terms of the volume of services it was desired to deliver, and
denominated in what commentators used to call ‘funny money’ —
neither the prices at the time of the spending decision, nor those when
the money was actually spent. The result was that the Treasury never
knew until far too late in the day the cash consequences of decisions
on spending. Cash limits on some government spending had already
been introduced, but paradoxically, this increased the confusion as
spending which had been planned in volume ran up against them.
From now on everything was to be planned in cash — though, of
course, departments would still have to estimate the volume of
services which their cash limits would enable them to afford. This
imposed the sort of financial discipline on government departments
with which the private sector had to deal. The ‘cash limits’ approach
had the valuable consequence of bearing down on real public
expenditure. It also gave departments a much stronger interest in
seeking out the most efficient way of delivering the services expected
of them.
Unsurprisingly, however, it was not the adoption of cash planning
which grabbed the budget headlines, but rather the severity of the tax
increases. The budget was very unpopular. But some of the leader
columns were more favourable than the headlines and no one could
doubt that this was a coherent budget which had required a good deal
of courage to introduce. In the eyes of our critics, of course, the
strategy was fundamentally wrong. If you believed, as they did, that
increased government borrowing was the way to get out of recession,
then our approach was inexplicable. If, on the other hand, you
thought, as we did, that the way to get industry moving again was
above all to get down interest rates, then you had to reduce
government borrowing. Far from being deflationary, our budget would
have the reverse effect: by cutting government borrowing and over
time easing the monetary squeeze, it would allow interest rates and
the exchange rate to fall, both of which had created severe difficulties
for industry. I doubt that there has ever been a clearer test of two
fundamentally different approaches to economic management.

The economists themselves realized that this was so. At the end of
March 1981 no fewer than 364 leading members of the profession
published a statement taking issue with our policy. Samuel Brittan of
the Financial Times defended us, and so did Professor Patrick Minford
from Liverpool University, who wrote to The Times answering the 364;
I in turn wrote to congratulate him on his brilliant defence of the
Government’s approach. We had made our decision: the task now was
to hold the political line and, where possible, to win the political
argument while waiting for the strategy to work. I was confident that
it would.
The dissenters in the Cabinet, meanwhile, had been stunned by the
budget when they learnt its contents at the traditional morning
Cabinet on budget day. The press was soon full of leaks expressing
their fury and frustration. They knew that the budget gave them a
political opportunity. Because it departed so radically from post-war
economic orthodoxy, even some of our supporters would not wholly
believe in the strategy until it started to yield results. That might not
be for some time. So it was clear that the Party in the country must be
mobilized in support of what we were doing. The forthcoming Central
Council of the Conservative Party in Bournemouth provided an
opportunity for me to do this. I had decided some time before that I
would try not to go to every Central Council because the number of
party political occasions I was under pressure to address each year was
enormous: there were separate conferences of the English, Scottish and
Welsh parties, the Women’s Conference, Local Government Conference
and Conferences of Young Conservatives, Conservative Students and
Conservative Trade Unionists. However, I soon learnt that Central
Council provided an opportunity which I could never afford to miss.
Certainly that was true on this occasion. John Hoskyns and I worked
late on Friday night and early into Saturday morning on my speech,
which I delivered later that day. In it I threw down the challenge:
In the past our people have made sacrifices, only to find at the eleventh hour
their government had lost its nerve and the sacrifice had been in vain. It
shall not be in vain this time. This Conservative Government, not yet two
years in office, will hold fast until the future of our country is assured. I do
not greatly care what people say about me: I do greatly care what people
think about our country. Let us, then, keep calm and strong, and let us
preserve that mutual friendship in which patriotism consists. This is the road
I am resolved to follow. This is the path I must go. I ask all who have the
spirit — the bold, the steadfast and the young in heart — to stand and join
with me as we go forward. For there is no other company in which I would
travel.

I got a good reception. For the moment at least, the Party faithful
were prepared to take the heat and to back the Government. But that
determination might erode over the summer unless the Government
stuck together.
THE COAL STRIKE WHICH NEVER WAS

Thankfully, strikes occupied far less of our time during 1981 than they
had in 1980, and the number of working days lost due to strike action
was only a third of that in the previous year. But two disputes — one
in the coal industry, which did not in the end result in a strike, and
another in the civil service, which did* — were of great importance,
both to budget decisions and to the overall political climate.
A foreigner unaware of the extraordinary legacy of state socialism in
Britain would probably have found the threatened miners’ strike in
January 1981 quite incomprehensible: £2.5 billion of taxpayers’
money had been invested in the coal industry since 1974; productivity
at some of the new pits was high, and a slimmed-down and
competitive coal industry could have provided employees with good,
well-paid jobs. But this was possible only if uneconomic pits were
closed, which the National Coal Board (NCB) wished to do. Moreover,
the pits which the NCB was intent on closing in a programme it put
forward in early 1981 were not just uneconomic but more or less
exhausted. On 27 January the Energy Secretary, David Howell, told
me about the closure plans. The following afternoon Sir Derek Ezra,
NCB Chairman, visited Downing Street and briefed me in person. I
agreed with him that with coal stocks piling up and the recession
continuing there was no alternative to speeding up the closure of
uneconomic pits. I had long regretted that past governments had made
such an enormous commitment to coal: if we had spent more on
nuclear power, as the French had done, our electricity would have
been cheaper — and, indeed, our supplies more secure.
As in the cases of BSC and BL, it was the management which had to
implement the agreed approach and, inevitably, the Government
found itself dragged into a crisis we had neither sought nor predicted.
The press was soon full of NCB plans to close 50 pits and a bitter
conflict was predicted. The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM)
was pledged to fight closures and although Joe Gormley, its President,
was a moderate, the powerful left-wing faction of the union was bound
to exploit the situation and it was well known that Arthur Scargill, the
hard-left leader, was likely to succeed Mr Gormley as President in the
near future.
At a meeting with the NUM on 11 February the NCB Board resisted
pressure to publish a list of pits which it was proposing to close and
denied the figure of 50. However, the Board failed to mention the idea
of improved redundancy terms, which was already being discussed by
the Government, and instead undertook to join the NUM in an
approach to us seeking a lower level of coal imports, the maintenance
of a high level of public investment and subsidies comparable to those
allegedly being paid by other governments to coal industries abroad.
Far from acting as management might be expected to do, the NCB
Board was behaving as if it entirely shared the interests of the union
representing its employees. The situation quickly deteriorated further.
I was lucky to have a private, independent and knowledgeable source

of advice in my press secretary, Bernard Ingham who, before working
for me in Downing Street, had spent some years in the Department of
Energy and was convinced from the start that the department was far
too complacent about the threat posed by a strike.
On Monday 16 February I had a meeting with David Howell and
others. Their tone had entirely changed. The department had suddenly
been forced to look over the abyss and had recoiled. The objective had
now become to avoid an all-out national strike at the minimum cost in
concessions. David Howell would have to agree to a tripartite meeting
with the NUM and the NCB to achieve this. The tone of the NCB
Chairman had also changed in short order. I was appalled to find that
we had inadvertently entered into a battle which we could not win.
There had been no forward thinking in the Department of Energy
about what would happen in the case of a strike. The coal stocks piled
at the pit heads were largely irrelevant to the question of whether the
country could endure a strike: it was the stocks at the power stations
which were important, and these were simply not sufficient. I had by
now even less confidence in the NCB management. It became very
clear that all we could do was to cut our losses and live to fight
another day, when — with adequate preparation — we might be in a
position to win. When my attitude became clear one official could not
prevent himself expressing disappointment and surprise. My reply was
simple: there is no point in embarking on a battle unless you are
reasonably confident you can win. Defeat in a coal strike would have
been disastrous.
The tripartite meeting was due to take place on 23 February. In the
interim, we were hoping that the NCB would be able to make a more
effective presentation of their case and to prevent the NUM continuing
to make all the running. Indeed, we were advised that unless we held
the tripartite meeting earlier than planned the NUM Executive might
vote for a strike ballot. On the morning of 18 February I met hurriedly
with David Howell to agree on the concessions which would have to
be offered to stave off a strike. There was still considerable confusion
as to what the facts really were. Whereas the NCB had been reported
to be seeking 50 or 60 pit closures, it now appeared that they were
talking about 23. But the tripartite meeting achieved its immediate
objective: the strike was averted. The Government undertook to
reduce imports of coal to the irreducible minimum, with David Howell
indicating that we were prepared to discuss the financial implications
with an open mind. Sir Derek Ezra said that in the light of this
undertaking to review the financial constraints under which the NCB
was operating, the Board would withdraw its closure proposals and reexamine the position in consultation with the unions.
The following day David Howell made a statement to the Commons
to explain the outcome of the meeting. The press reaction was that the
miners had won a major victory at the expense of the Government, but
that we had probably been right to surrender. This was not, however,

the end of our difficulties. We agreed to improve the redundancy
terms for coal miners, to finance a scheme for conversion from oil to
coal in industry and to look again at NCB finances. As is always the
case once corporatism takes a grip, it became extremely difficult to
bring the tripartite discussions to an end without provoking a crisis
and equally difficult to ensure that the whole question of government
finance for the NCB did not come onto the agenda. It had already
emerged at the tripartite meeting on 25 February that the NCB was in
far deeper financial trouble than we had known. They were likely to
overrun their external financing limit (EFL), which had already been
set at some £800 million, by between £450 and £500 million and were
expecting to make a loss of £350 million. We would need to challenge
these figures and examine them in detail, but we could not do this —
as the NCB Board undoubtedly realized — when the NUM knew
almost as much about the NCB’s financial position as we did.
Therefore, our aim must be to draw a ring fence around the coal
industry by arguing that coal was a special case rather than a
precedent. We must seek to avoid any commitment for the years
beyond 1981–2. Above all, we must prepare contingency plans in case
the NUM sought a confrontation in the next pay round.
We confirmed these decisions at a meeting of ministers on 5 March.
David Howell skilfully handled the next tripartite meeting on 11
March, at which it was understood that we would not need another
tripartite meeting until the NCB’s financial position had been resolved.
Meanwhile, he had been instructed to prepare a memorandum on
contingency plans and circulate it by Easter.
Having managed to ease the Government out of an impossible
position — at what I knew to be a high political cost — I concentrated
attention on limiting the financial consequences of our retreat and
preparing the ground so that we would never be put in such an awful
situation again. David Howell had been shaken by what had
happened. He feared a repetition of the events of January. There was
much argument between him and the Treasury about the new EFL for
the NCB and the level of investment we ought to finance. We had to
agree to an EFL of well over £1 billion. Similarly, the threat of strike
action constrained what we could do immediately to increase our
capacity to endure a future strike. It was clear that coal stocks at the
power stations must be increased, but it was impossible to take this
action without its becoming known, and the faster stocks were
transferred the more visible it would be. Jim Prior advised that we
should not even discuss the matter with the industries involved, on the
ground that it would be provocative to do so. The Department of
Energy was very slow in giving effect to the decision that 4–5 million
tons should be moved by the time that the NUM pay negotiations took
place in the autumn. We were told that the Central Electricity
Generating Board (CEGB) would probably have to acquire extra land if
higher stocks than this were to be built up. I held a meeting on 19

June to review the position. It seemed to me that the risks of moving
coal stocks had been exaggerated. After all, stocks at the pits had
increased from 13 million to 22 million tons over the past 12 months
and it was natural that there should be some extra movement.
The real question in my mind was whether — even if we could
substantially increase the rate of movement of coal to the power
stations — we would in practice be able to resist a strike that winter. It
was evident from the NUM Conference which took place in Jersey in
July that the left wing of the union had become obsessed with the idea
of taking on the Government and that Arthur Scargill, by this stage
certain of the presidency, would make this his policy. Willie Whitelaw,
as Home Secretary the minister in overall charge of civil contingency
planning, had overseen a study of how to withstand a coal strike that
winter. He sent me a report on 22 July, which concluded that a strike
this year probably could not be withstood for more than 13–14 weeks.
The calculations took account of the transfer of coal stocks which we
had put in hand. In theory, endurance could be increased by power
cuts or the use of troops to move coal to the power stations. But either
option was fraught with difficulty. There would be huge political
pressure to give in to a strike. The union might see what was up if we
set about increasing oil stocks for power stations. In August I
reluctantly concluded that no such action should be taken in advance
of that year’s NUM pay settlement. We would have to rely on a
judicious mixture of flexibility and bluff until the Government was in a
position to face down the challenge posed to the economy, and indeed
potentially to the rule of law, by the combined force of monopoly and
union power in the coal industry.
THE URBAN RIOTS OF 1981
Over the weekend of 10–12 April, riots broke out in Brixton, South
London. Shops were looted, vehicles destroyed, and 149 police officers
and 58 members of the public were injured. Two hundred and fifteen
people were arrested. There were frightening scenes, reminiscent of
riots in the United States during the 1960s and ‘70s. I accepted Willie
Whitelaw’s suggestion that Lord Scarman, the distinguished Law Lord,
should undertake an enquiry into the causes of what had happened
and make recommendations.
There was a lull; then on Friday 3 July a battle in Southall between
white skinheads and Asian youths erupted into a riot in which the
police quickly became the main victims, attacked with petrol bombs,
bricks and anything else to hand. The mob even turned on firemen and
ambulancemen. Over the weekend, Toxteth in Liverpool was also the
scene of violence: once again there were outbreaks of arson, looting
and savage attacks on the police. The Merseyside police reacted
vigorously and dispersed the mob with CS gas.

On 8 and 9 July it was the turn of Moss Side in Manchester to
experience two days of serious disorder. The police presence was
initially kept deliberately low, in the hope that ‘community leaders’
could calm matters down. This they singularly failed to do and so the
police had to move into the area in strength. Willie Whitelaw told me
after his visits to Manchester and Liverpool that the Moss Side riots
had taken the form of looting and hooliganism rather than direct
confrontation with the police. In Liverpool, as I was to learn, racial
tension and bitter hostility to the police — in my view encouraged by
left-wing extremists — were more important.
The riots were, of course, a godsend to the Labour Opposition and
the Government’s critics in general. Here was the long-awaited
evidence that our economic policy was causing social breakdown and
violence. In the Commons and elsewhere I found myself countering the
argument that the riots had been caused by unemployment. Behind
their hands, some Conservatives echoed this criticism, complaining
that the social fabric was being torn apart by the doctrinaire
monetarism we had espoused. This rather overlooked the fact that
riots, football hooliganism and crime generally had been on the
increase since the 1960s, most of that time under the very economic
policies that our critics were urging us to adopt. A third explanation —
that racial minorities were reacting to police brutality and racial
discrimination — we took more seriously. Indeed, it was for this
reason that we had invited Lord Scarman to investigate and report on
the causes of the riots immediately after the Brixton riots in April.
Following his report we introduced a statutory framework for
consultation between the police and local authorities, tightened the
rules on stopping and searching suspects, and brought in other
measures relating to police recruitment, training and discipline.
Whatever Lord Scarman might recommend, however — and
whatever Michael Heseltine might achieve later by skilful public
relations when he had begun to investigate the problems of Merseyside
— the immediate requirement was that law and order should be
restored. I told Willie on Saturday 11 July that I intended to go to
Scotland Yard and wished to be shown how they handled the
difficulties on the ground.
After a briefing at Scotland Yard I was taken round Brixton. At
Brixton Police Station I went into the canteen to thank the staff there
— as I had thanked the police officers themselves — for all that they
were doing. I also talked with the West Indian ladies in the canteen.
They had gone into work throughout the disturbances, determined
that the police should be supported with proper canteen facilities
whenever they needed them at any hour of the day or night. They
were clearly as disgusted as I was with those who were causing the
trouble.
Later I returned to Scotland Yard where I had a long discussion with
the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, Sir David McNee, his

Deputy and Assistant. They had a number of worries: they told me that
they wanted to see sentences administered quickly on the offenders —
something which long delays at the Crown Courts often prevented;
they were concerned that their powers of arrest were insufficient; and
above all, they needed proper riot equipment, as a matter of urgency. I
promised them every support. It was something of a shock to
contemplate the kind of equipment the British police now required,
which included a greater variety of riot shields, more vehicles, longer
truncheons, and sufficient stocks of rubber bullets and water cannon.
They had already received vital protective helmets from the MoD, but
these had had to be altered because the visors provided inadequate
protection against burning petrol. Afterwards I stressed to Willie the
urgency of meeting these requirements.
On Monday 13 July I made a similar visit to Liverpool. Driving
through Toxteth, the scene of the disturbances, I observed that for all
that was said about deprivation, the housing there was by no means
the worst in the city. I had been told that some of the young people
involved got into trouble through boredom and not having enough to
do. But you had only to look at the grounds around those houses with
the grass untended, some of it almost waist high, and the litter, to see
that this was a false analysis. They had plenty of constructive things to
do if they wanted. Instead, I asked myself how people could live in
such circumstances without trying to clear up the mess and improve
their surroundings. What was clearly lacking was a sense of pride and
personal responsibility — something which the state can easily remove
but almost never give back.
The first people I talked to in Liverpool were the police, whose
comments and requirements for equipment were similar to those in
London. I also met councillors at Liverpool City Hall and then talked
to a group of community leaders and young people. I was appalled by
the latter’s hostility to the Chief Constable and the police. But I
listened carefully to what they had to say. There were two people with
them who appeared to be social workers, and who began by trying to
speak on their behalf. But these young people did not need anyone to
speak for them: they were articulate and talked about their problems
with great sincerity. The press were rather confused when, contrary to
what they had been expecting, the youngsters told them that I had
indeed listened. But I did more than listen: I had something to say
myself. I reminded them that resources had been poured into
Liverpool. I told them that I was very concerned by what they had said
about the police and that while the colour of a person’s skin did not
matter to me at all, crime did. I urged them not to resort to violence or
to try to live in separate communities from the rest of us. Before I
returned to London I also talked to the Catholic Archbishop and the
Anglican Bishop of Liverpool, who had jointly won national attention
as great advocates for their city.

The whole visit left me in no doubt as I drove back that evening that
we faced immense problems in areas like Toxteth and Brixton. People
had to find once again a sense of respect for the law, for the
neighbourhood, and indeed for themselves. Despite our
implementation of most of Scarman’s recommendations and the inner
city initiatives we were to take, none of the conventional remedies
relying on state action and public spending was likely to prove
effective. The causes went much deeper; so must the cures.
The rioters were invariably young men, whose high animal spirits,
usually kept in check by a whole range of social constraints, had on
these occasions been unleashed to wreak havoc. What had become of
the constraints? A sense of community — including the watchful
disapproval of neighbours — is the strongest such barrier. But this
sense had been lost in the inner cities for a variety of reasons. Often
those neighbourhoods were the artificial creation of local authorities
which had uprooted people from genuine communities and decanted
them into badly designed and ill-maintained estates where they did
not know their new neighbours. Some of these new ‘neighbourhoods’,
because of large-scale immigration, were ethnically mixed; on top of
the tensions which might initially arise in any event, even immigrant
families with a very strong sense of traditional values found those
values undermined in their own children by messages from the
surrounding culture. In particular, welfare arrangements encouraged
dependency and discouraged a sense of responsibility, and television
undermined common moral values that would once have united
working-class communities. The results were a steadily increasing rise
in crime (among young men) and illegitimacy (among young women).
All that was needed for these to flower into full-scale rioting was the
decline of authority and the consequent feeling among potential
rioters that they could probably get away with mayhem. Authority of
all kinds — in the home, the school, the churches and the state — had
been in decline for most of the post-war years. Hence the rise in
football hooliganism, race riots and delinquency over that period.
There had even been one or two cases when the nervous indecision of
the police — for instance in withdrawing officers from riots until
reinforcements arrived — had both encouraged the rioters and
undermined the confidence of law-abiding members of the
community. What perhaps aggravated the 1981 riots into a virtual
saturnalia, however, was the impression given by television that, for
all these reasons, rioters could enjoy a fiesta of crime, looting and
rioting in the guise of social protest. They had been absolved in
advance. These are precisely the circumstances in which young men
riot, and riot again — and they have nothing whatever to do with
£M3.
Once we had solved the problem of the British economy, however,
we would need to turn to those deeper and more intractable problems.
I did so in my second and third terms with the set of policies for

housing, education, local authorities and social security that my
advisers, over my objections, wanted to call ‘Social Thatcherism’. But
we had only begun to make an impact on these by the time I left
office.
MORE CABINET DISSENT AND THE
SEPTEMBER 1981 RESHUFFLE
It was the 1981 budget, however, which throughout the summer
continued to agitate the Cabinet. Some ministers were long-standing in
their dissent. Others on whose support I had counted in the past began
to fall away. The irony was that at the very time the opposition to the
strategy was greatest, the trough of the recession had already been
reached. Whereas in 1980 the dissenters in the Cabinet had refused to
face up to the true seriousness of the economic situation and so had
insisted on higher government spending than we could afford, in 1981
they made the opposite mistake by exaggerating the bleakness of the
economic outlook and calling for even higher spending in a bid to
reflate the economy out of recession. Surely there is something
logically suspect about a solution which is always correct whatever the
problem.
One of the myths perpetuated by the media at this time was that
Treasury ministers and I were obsessively secretive about economic
policy, seeking always to avoid debate in Cabinet. In view of past leaks
that might indeed have been an understandable approach, but it was
never one we adopted. Geoffrey Howe was anxious to have three or
four full economic discussions in Cabinet every year, in the belief that
it would help us to win greater support for the policy; I doubted
whether discussions of this sort would achieve a meeting of minds, but
I went along with Geoffrey’s suggestion as long as it generated
practical results, and in particular greater realism about public
expenditure.
At the Cabinet in mid-June there was a general discussion of the
economy lasting two hours, based on several Treasury papers dealing
with various elements in the debate. The main paper was a full survey
of recent economic developments and the economic prospect. It
showed that the public finances had been placed on a sounder basis:
we had cut borrowing and repaid some international debt. Interest
rates at 12 per cent in the UK were now substantially below those in
the US and France, and lower than those of the major industrialized
countries generally. Industrial production had ceased to fall, though
unemployment — a lagging indicator, as always — was still rising.
The tax burden was up; but we were at least financing that spending in
a sound way — and honest money was essential to sustainable
recovery.
Other ministers, however, saw little that was positive in this picture.
They believed that unemployment over three million — the figure now

predicted — was politically unacceptable and that higher government
spending should be used to accelerate and strengthen economic
recovery. My own analysis was entirely different: the way to achieve
recovery was to ensure that a smaller proportion of the nation’s
income went to government, freeing resources for the private sector
where the majority of people worked.
All these arguments came to a head at the Cabinet discussion on
Thursday 23 July. I had more than an inkling of what was coming.
Indeed before I went down to the Cabinet Room that morning, I had
said to Denis that we had not come this far to go back now. I would
not stay as Prime Minister unless we saw the strategy through.
Spending ministers had submitted bids for extra expenditure of more
than £6.5 billion, of which some £2.5 billion was demanded for the
nationalized industries. But in view of past overspending and of the
tax increases which had taken place already, the Treasury urged
reduced public spending for 1982–3, below the totals derived from the
March white paper. The result was one of the bitterest arguments on
the economy, or any subject, that I can ever recall taking place at
Cabinet during my premiership. The ‘wets’, of course, argued their
case with redoubled vigour, strengthened by the lack of any evidence
that our policies had turned things round. Some argued for extra
public spending and borrowing as a better route to recovery than tax
cuts. There was talk of a pay freeze. Even those, like John Nott, who
had been known for their views on sound finance, attacked Geoffrey
Howe’s proposals as unnecessarily harsh. All at once the whole
strategy was at issue. It was as if tempers suddenly broke. I too
became extremely angry. I had thought that we could rely on these
people when the crunch came. I just was not interested in this kind of
creative accounting that enabled fair-weather monetarists to justify an
about-turn. Others, though, were as loyal as ever, notably Willie, Keith
and, of course, Geoffrey himself who was a tower of strength at this
time. And indeed it was their loyalty that saw us through.
I had said at the beginning of the government ‘give me six strong
men and true, and I will get through.’ Very rarely did I have as many
as six. So I responded vigorously in defence of the Chancellor. I was
prepared to have a further paper on the issue of tax cuts versus public
spending. But I warned of the effects on international confidence of
public expenditure increases or any departure from the MTFS. I was
determined that the strategy should continue. But when I closed the
meeting I knew that there were too many in Cabinet who did not share
that view. Moreover, after what had been said it would be difficult for
this group of ministers to act as a team again.
Much of this bitter disagreement found its way into the press — and
not simply in reports of what had been said in Cabinet derived from
nonattributable ministerial comments, but also in the form of scarcely
coded public speeches and statements. There were particularly
embarrassing comments from Francis Pym and Peter Thorneycroft,

who between them were meant to be responsible for the public
presentation of our policies. At Francis’s suggestion I had authorized
the recreation of the ‘Liaison Committee’, at which ministers and
Central Office were supposed to work together to achieve a coherent
message. In August it became clear that these arrangements were
actually being used to undermine the strategy.
Geoffrey Howe had said in the House of Commons that the CBI’s
latest Industrial Trends Survey provided evidence that we were now at
the end of the recession — a remark which may have been slightly
imprudent, but which was strictly true. The following weekend Francis
Pym in the course of a lengthy speech observed: ‘there are few signs
yet of when an upturn will occur. And that recovery when it comes in
due course may be slower and less pronounced than in the past.’ This
forecast would have been bold even from an economist; coming from
Francis it verged on the visionary. For good measure he added that ‘in
our industrial policy we must work as partners with industry and with
the trade unions to identify the key sectors of the economy and the
most promising export markets’ — the kind of neo-corporatist
incantation which signified total rejection of the economic strategy.
Even Peter Thorneycroft, who had been a superb chairman of the
Party in Opposition, joined the ‘wet’ chorus, describing himself as
suffering from ‘rising damp’ and saying that ‘there [was] no great sign
of [the economy] picking up.’ Given that these comments came from
the two men in charge of presenting government policy, they were
extremely damaging and easily seen (in that inevitable metaphor) as
‘the tip of the iceberg’.
Trade union reform was another subject of Cabinet disagreement.
We had issued a green paper on trade union immunities on which
comments were to be received by the end of June 1981. When they
came in, these showed a desire among businessmen for further radical
action to bring trade unions fully under the rule of law. But Jim Prior
and I disagreed about what should be done. I wanted further action to
restrict trade union immunities, which would make union funds liable
to court action. Jim’s proposals would not have achieved this. His
analysis was, indeed, fundamentally different from mine. In his
reading, history showed that the unions could defeat any legislation if
they wanted to. I believed that history showed nothing of the sort, but
rather that governments in the past had failed the nation through lack
of nerve — drawing back when the battle was nearly won. I was also
convinced that on the issue of union reform there was a great reserve
of public support on which we could draw. Indeed, as I told Jim, I
thought that there was a real risk that people would consider that we
had done very little to tackle trade union power.
The differences between Cabinet ministers over the economic
strategy — and between myself and Jim Prior over trade union reform
— were not just ones of emphasis but of fundamentals. If the goals I
had set out in Opposition were to be achieved they must be reaffirmed

and fought for by a new Cabinet. So it was quite clear to me that a
major reshuffle was needed if our economic policy were to continue,
and perhaps if I were to remain Prime Minister.
I preferred to have a Cabinet reshuffle during the recess if possible,
so that ministers could get used to their departments before being
questioned in the House. I also believed that as matters usually got
fairly difficult at the end of July, it was better for all of us to have a
holiday before decisions were taken. It was not, therefore, until
September that I discussed the details with my closest advisers. Willie
Whitelaw, Michael Jopling (the Chief Whip) and Ian Gow came over
to Chequers on the weekend of 12–13 September. For part of the time
Peter Carrington and Cecil Parkinson joined us. The reshuffle itself
took place on the Monday.
I always saw first those who were being asked to leave the Cabinet. I
began with Ian Gilmour and told him of my decision. He was — I can
find no other word for it — huffy. He left Downing Street and
denounced government policy to the television cameras as ‘steering
full speed ahead for the rocks’ — altogether a flawless imitation of a
man who has resigned on principle. Christopher Soames was equally
angry — but in a grander way. I got the distinct impression that he felt
the natural order of things was being violated and that he was, in
effect, being dismissed by his housemaid. Mark Carlisle, who had not
been a very effective Education Secretary and leaned to the left, also
left the Cabinet — but he did so with courtesy and good humour. Jim
Prior was obviously shocked to be moved from Employment where he
had come to consider himself all but indispensable. The press had been
full of his threats to resign from the Government altogether if he were
asked to leave his present position. I wanted this post for the
formidable Norman Tebbit, and Jim could not intimidate me by
threatening himself. So I called his bluff, and offered him the post of
Northern Ireland Secretary. He asked for time to consider, and after
some agonizing and some telephoning he accepted my offer and
became Secretary of State for Northern Ireland in place of the
debonair Humphrey Atkins, who succeeded Ian Gilmour as the main
Foreign Office minister in the Commons.
I moved David Howell from Energy to Transport. It gave me great
pleasure to promote the immensely talented Nigel Lawson, the
intellectual author of the MTFS, into the Cabinet to take his place.
Nigel turned out to be a highly successful Secretary of State for
Energy, vigorously promoting competition, taking a real grip on his
department and building up coal stocks for the inevitable struggle with
the miners.
Keith Joseph had told me that he wished to move from Industry.
With his belief that there was an anti-enterprise culture which had
harmed Britain’s economic performance over the years, it was natural
that Keith should now wish to go to Education where that culture had
taken deep roots. Accordingly, I sent Keith to my old department to

replace Mark Carlisle. Norman Fowler returned to take up Health and
Social Security, the portfolio he had held in Opposition, replacing
Patrick Jenkin who took over at Industry from Keith. Janet Young, a
friend for many years who had first become involved in politics as
leader of Oxford City Council, became Leader of the House of Lords,
the first woman to hold the post, taking over Christopher Soames’s
responsibility for the civil service.
Perhaps the most important change was the promotion of Norman
Tebbit to replace Jim Prior at Employment. Norman had had
experience of dealing with industrial relations as a trade unionist
himself. He had been an official of the British Airline Pilots’
Association and had no illusions about the vicious world of hard-left
trade unionism, nor, by contrast, any doubt about the fundamental
decency of most trade union members. As a true believer in the kind of
approach Keith Joseph and I stood for, Norman understood how trade
union reform fitted into our overall strategy. Norman was also one of
the Party’s most effective performers in Parliament and on a public
platform. The fact that the Left howled disapproval confirmed that he
was just the right man for the job. He was someone they feared.
I had already agreed with Peter Thorneycroft that he should cease to
be Party Chairman. I had been unhappy about some of Peter’s actions
in recent months. But I would never forget how much he did to help
win the 1979 election. He was one of an older school of political
leaders — a man of force and character — and remained a friend. I
appointed Cecil Parkinson to succeed him — dynamic, full of common
sense, a good accountant, an excellent presenter and, no less
important, on my wing of the Party.
The whole nature of the Cabinet changed as a result of these
changes. After the new Cabinet’s first meeting I remarked to David
Wolfson and John Hoskyns what a difference it made to have most of
the people in it on my side. This did not mean that we would always
agree, or that there would not be the regular arguments about public
spending. There would always be some dissent and Jim Prior at his
own request remained a member of ‘E’ committee, the economic
committee of the Cabinet. But it would be a number of years before
there arose an issue which fundamentally divided me from the
majority of my Cabinet, and by then Britain’s economic recovery, so
much a matter of controversy in 1981, had been accepted — perhaps
all too easily accepted — as a fact of life.
The day after the reshuffle, The Times leader entitled Prima Inter
Pares, summed up reaction to the changes I had made:
the final impression … left by this reshuffle is the indelible stamp and style
of the Prime Minister herself. She has reasserted her political dominance and
restated her faith in her own policies. She has rewarded those who do, and
punished some of those who do not share that faith. If she succeeds — and
by success we mean regenerating the British economy and winning the next
election for the Conservative Party — it will be a remarkable personal
triumph. If she fails, the fault will be laid at her door, though the damage

and the casualties will spread wide through the political and economic
landscape.
I could accept that.

THE 1981 CONSERVATIVE PARTY
CONFERENCE
The ‘wets’ had been defeated, but they did not yet fully realize it, and
decided to make a last assault at the 1981 Party Conference in
Blackpool that October.
The circumstances on the eve of the conference were grim. Inflation,
which had fallen sharply since 1980, remained stubbornly at between
11 and 12 per cent. Largely as a result of the US budget deficit,
interest rates had been increased by 2 per cent in mid-September,
temporarily wiping out the reduction made possible at such cost by
the budget in March. Then, shortly after I arrived at Melbourne for the
Commonwealth Conference on 30 September, I received a telephone
call to say that we would have to make a second increase of 2 per
cent. So interest rates now stood at an alarming 16 per cent.
Above all, unemployment continued its inexorable rise: it would
reach the headline figure of three million in January 1982, but already
in the autumn of 1981 it seemed almost inevitable that this would
happen. Most people were unpersuaded, therefore, that recession was
coming to an end and it was too soon for the new sense of direction in
Cabinet — which I knew that the reshuffle would bring — to have had
an effect on public opinion.
We were also in political difficulties for another reason. The
weakness of the Labour Party, which had initially worked in our
favour, had allowed the newly formed SDP to leap into political
contention. In October the Liberals and SDP were standing at 40 per
cent in the opinion polls: by the end of the year the figure was over 50
per cent. (At the Crosby by-election in the last week of November
Shirley Williams was able to overturn a 19,000 Conservative majority
to get back into the Commons.) On the eve of our Party Conference I
was being described in the press as ‘the most unpopular prime minister
since polls began’.
Of course, the statistics were misleading at this point. Interest rates
would have been higher still had we not taken the action we did in the
budget. We were able to begin reducing rates again within weeks. And
demographic factors were as important as the recession in explaining
the rise of unemployment. The low birth rates during the First World
War meant that fewer people were retiring in the early 1980s than in
the early 1970s. At the same time the number of young people
entering the labour market reached record levels as a result of the
1960s ‘baby boom’. Between 1979 and 1981 the economy had to
provide an extra 83,000 jobs a year just to stop unemployment rising.

But that was not how it seemed at the time — and the ‘wets’
determined to exploit our apparent difficulties to the full at Blackpool.
I witnessed what seemed to be a concerted attempt to swing the Party
against the Government’s policies both in the Conference Hall and at
the fringe meetings outside. In a speech to the Selsdon Group the
critics were brilliantly answered by Nigel Lawson. Nigel pointed out
that it was no argument for them to take refuge in political
generalities:
You cannot fight the war against inflation successfully unless you have
economic policies that make sense. There is no point in deluding yourself
that somehow politics can trump all that … What we are being offered [by
the strategy’s critics] is little more than cold feet dressed up as high
principle.

In the conference economic debate no less a figure than Ted Heath
spearheaded the attack. He argued that there were alternative policies
available but that we just refused to adopt them. The debate was well
mannered in form, well versed in content and passionate in feeling.
Both sides delivered serious economic analyses at a high level — and
the stakes themselves were very high. A rebuff for the platform would
have emboldened back-bench ‘wets’ to step up their attack when
Parliament resumed, with unpredictable consequences; a rebuff for the
critics, which is what they received, would strengthen our moral
authority. In answer to Ted Heath, Geoffrey Howe, who summed up
our case with a cool, measured and persuasive speech, reminded the
conference of Ted’s own words in his introduction to the 1970
Conservative manifesto:
Nothing has done Britain more harm in the world than the endless backing
and filling which we have seen in recent years. Once a policy has been
established, the prime minister and his colleagues should have the courage
to stick with it.

’I agree with every single word of that,’ said Geoffrey. His speech
won over some of the doubters and ensured that we had a comfortable
win. Nevertheless, in my own speech later I felt the need to fasten
down our victory by taking the arguments of Ted Heath and others
head on:
Today’s unemployment is partly due to the sharp increase in oil prices; it
absorbed money that might otherwise have gone to increased investment or
to buy in the things which British factories produce. But that is not all. Too
much of our present unemployment is due to enormous past wage increases
unmatched by higher output, to union restrictive practices, to overmanning,
to strikes, to indifferent management, and to the basic belief that, come what
may, the government would always step in to bail out companies in
difficulty. No policy can succeed that shirks those basic issues.

Even though the ‘wets’ would continue to be sceptics for another six
months, our policy had already begun to succeed. The early signs of
recovery in the summer of 1981 were confirmed by statistics in the
following quarter, which marked the start of a long period of sustained

economic growth. Political recovery followed in the wake of these
early signs of improvement, with better poll figures in the spring of
1982. We were about to find ourselves in the Falklands War, but we
had already won the second Battle of Britain.
Higher interest rates caused people to increase the amount they held in interestbearing financial assets and to reduce cash and non-interest-bearing assets in their
current accounts.
*

The civil service strike began in March 1981 and lasted for five months. Union
members struck selectively at crucial government installations, including computer
staff involved in tax collection, costing the Government over £350 million in interest
charges on money borrowed to cover delayed and lost tax revenue. Industrial action
was also taken at GCHQ, the installation at the heart of Britain’s signals intelligence,
which led to our decision in January 1984 to ban trade unions there.
*

CHAPTER VI

The West and the Rest
The early reassertion of western — and British — influence in
international affairs in 1981–1982

We were not to know it at the time, but 1981 was the last year of the
West’s retreat before the axis of convenience between the Soviet Union
and the Third World. The year began with Iran’s release of US
hostages in a manner calculated to humiliate President Carter and
ended with the crushing, albeit temporarily, of Solidarity in Poland.
The post-Vietnam drift of international politics, with the Soviet Union
pushing further into the Third World with the help of Cuban
surrogates, and the United States reacting with a nervous
defensiveness, had settled into an apparently fixed pattern. Several
consequences flowed from that. The Soviet Union was increasingly
arrogant; the Third World was increasingly aggressive in its demands
for international redistribution of wealth; the West was increasingly
apt to quarrel with itself, and to cut special deals with bodies like
OPEC; and our friends in Third World countries, seeing the fate of the
Shah, were increasingly inclined to hedge their bets. Such
countervailing trends as had been set in motion — in particular, the
1979 decision to deploy Cruise and Pershing in Europe — had not yet
been given concrete effect or persuaded people that the tide had
turned. In fact it had just begun to do so.
EARLY TALKS WITH PRESIDENT REAGAN
The election of Ronald Reagan as President of the United States in
November 1980 was as much of a watershed in American affairs as my
own election victory in May 1979 was in those of the United Kingdom,
and, of course, a greater one in world politics. As the years went by,
the British example steadily influenced other countries in different
continents, particularly in economic policy. But Ronald Reagan’s
election was of immediate and fundamental importance, because it
demonstrated that the United States, the greatest force for liberty that
the world has known, was about to reassert a self-confident leadership
in world affairs. I never had any doubt of the importance of this
change and from the first I regarded it as my duty to do everything I
could to reinforce and further President Reagan’s bold strategy to win
the Cold War which the West had been slowly but surely losing.
I heard the news of the American election result in the early hours
of Wednesday 5 November and quickly sent my warmest
congratulations, inviting the President-elect to visit Britain soon. I had

met Governor Reagan twice before when I was Leader of the
Opposition. I had been immediately struck by his warmth, charm and
complete lack of affectation — qualities which never altered in the
years of leadership which lay ahead. Above all, I knew that I was
talking to someone who instinctively felt and thought as I did; not just
about policies but about a philosophy of government, a view of human
nature, all the high ideals and values which lie — or ought to lie —
beneath any politician’s ambition to lead his country.
It was easy for lesser men to underrate Ronald Reagan, as many of
his opponents had done in the past. His style of work and decisionmaking was apparently detached and broad-brush — very different
from my own. This was in part the result of our two very different
systems of government rather than differences of temperament. He
laid down clear general directions for his Administration, and expected
his subordinates to carry them out at the level of detail. These
objectives were the recovery of the American economy through tax
cuts, the revival of American power by means of a defence build-up,
and the reassertion of American self-confidence. Ronald Reagan
succeeded in attaining these objectives because he not only advocated
them; in a sense, he embodied them. He was a buoyant, self-confident,
good-natured American who had risen from poverty to the White
House — the American dream in action — and who was not shy about
using American power or exercising American leadership in the
Atlantic alliance. In addition to inspiring the American people, he
went on later to inspire the people behind the Iron Curtain by
speaking honest words about the evil empire that oppressed them.
At this point, however, the policies of military, economic and
technological competition with the Soviet Union were only beginning
to be put in place; and President Reagan still had to face a largely
sceptical audience at home and particularly among his allies, including
most of my colleagues in the Government. I was perhaps his principal
cheerleader in NATO.
So I was soon delighted to learn that the new president wished me
to be the first foreign head of government to visit the United States
after he took office. At 3.45 on the afternoon of Wednesday 25
February the RAF VC10 on which I travelled on such occasions took
off for Washington. Peter Carrington was with me. He did not
altogether share my view of the President’s policies and was intent on
pursuing lines which I knew would in practice be quite fruitless, given
the President’s unshakeable commitment to a limited number of
positions. The US was already meeting opposition from its allies on a
number of issues such as arms control, its support for the military
government in El Salvador, and increasingly the size of the US deficit.
We feared that the new Administration’s plans for tax cuts might
widen the deficit — though at this stage we were still hopeful that the
President would succeed in achieving the large expenditure cuts he
had put before Congress. With so many important things to discuss, I

could see no point in raising the issue of Namibia which Peter
Carrington wanted to do. I knew that the Americans would not press
the South Africans to withdraw from Namibia unless the 20,000 or so
Cubans also withdrew from neighbouring Angola. What is more, I
privately thought that they were fully justified in asserting this
linkage. In any case, there is one principle of diplomacy which
diplomats ought to recognize more often: there is no point in engaging
in conflict with a friend when you are not going to win and the cost of
losing may be the end of the friendship.
I spent the morning of my first day in Washington in meetings with
the President — first tête-à-tête, then with the US Secretary of State,
Alexander Haig, and Peter Carrington present, and finally with
members of the US Cabinet. Two events which occurred on the eve of
our discussions had a large impact on them.
First, the Assistant Secretary for European Affairs, Lawrence
Eagleburger, had come to Britain and other European capitals to show
us a dossier of evidence substantiating the US claim that arms from
Cuba, acting as a surrogate for the Soviet Union, were pouring into El
Salvador to support the revolution against the pro-western, if
undoubtedly unsavoury, government there. There was still some
difference of view about whether the threat was as serious as the US
claimed. But the evidence which we now saw made it easier to expess
support for the American objectives in the region and to resist the
pressure from other lobbies. A statement was issued by the Foreign
Office just before I left for America to this effect. President Reagan
explained to me his determination to pursue a new policy to resist
communist subversion via Cuba, which also involved closer US
relations with what it saw as a vulnerable and important neighbour,
Mexico. I understood all this and agreed with it: but I warned of the
danger of losing the propaganda war on El Salvador — the reporting
was very one-sided.
The second and much more important development was a speech by
President Brezhnev, proposing an international summit and offering a
moratorium on theatre nuclear forces (TNF) in Europe. Discussion
about how the new Administration should respond dominated the
hyperactive Washington media world. I had publicly expressed caution
both about the prospect of an early summit meeting and about the
Russian TNF proposals, which would have left them with
overwhelming superiority since they had deployed and we had not.
President Reagan turned out to be of the same mind. Both of us were
well aware of Soviet tactics and of the likelihood that this was only
part of their attempt to disorientate and divide their western
opponents. This was the latest phase in a Soviet propaganda battle in
which they proposed no further deployment of nuclear weapons just
when they had completed stationing their own modernized weapon
systems. This issue was to dominate alliance politics for the next six
years.

When I arrived in Washington I was the centre of attention not just
because of my closeness to the new president but for another less
flattering reason. As I left for America, US readers were learning from
a long article in Time entitled ‘Embattled but Unbowed’ that my
Government was beset with difficulties. The US press and
commentators suggested that given the similarity of economic
approach of the British and US Governments, the economic problems
we were now facing — above all high and rising unemployment —
would soon be faced in the US too. This in turn prompted some
members of the Administration and others close to it — but never for a
moment the President himself — to explain that the alleged failures of
the ‘Thatcher experiment’ stemmed from our failure to be sufficiently
radical. Indeed, while I was in Washington Treasury Secretary Donald
Regan spoke on similar lines to Congress before slipping away to join a
lunch at which I was the main guest; this predictably received plenty
of press coverage in Britain. I took every occasion to explain the facts
of the case both to the press and to the Senators and Congressmen
whom I met. Unlike the US, Britain had to cope with the poisonous
legacy of socialism — nationalization, trade union power, a deeply
rooted anti-enterprise culture. Labour’s prices and incomes policy,
combined with lax monetary policies, had greatly increased the
inevitable difficulty of transition, as the public sector pay explosion
forced up state spending. At one meeting, Senator Jesse Helms said
that some of the US media were playing a requiem for my
Government. I was able to reassure him that news of a requiem for my
policies was premature. There was always a period during an illness
when the medicine was more unpleasant than the disease, but you
should not stop taking the medicine. I said that I felt there was a deep
recognition among the British people that my policies were right.
After another short talk over coffee with the President, at which we
were joined by Nancy and Denis, my party left Washington for New
York. In the afternoon I had talks with Dr Waldheim, the UN
Secretary-General, and then that evening spoke to an audience on the
subject of ‘the Defence of Freedom’. In my speech I summed up my
feelings of cautious optimism about the decade now opening up before
us:
We have long known that the 1980s will be a difficult and dangerous decade.
There will be crises and hardships. But I believe the tide is beginning to turn
in our favour. The developing world is recognizing the realities of Soviet
ambitions and Soviet life. There is a new determination in the western
alliance. There is new leadership in America, which gives confidence and
hope to all in the free world.

VISITS TO INDIA AND THE GULF
On 20 May 1980 I had held a meeting to consider a subject which the
Russian invasion of Afghanistan had belatedly placed near the top of

the western international agenda — how to prevent Soviet expansion
in the developing world. With a revivified United States, the
possibilities had now been transformed. But I never doubted that, over
and above the role of ally and friend to the United States, there was
much that Britain could achieve and that no one else could. The Left
would have it that the legacy of the British empire was one of
bitterness and impoverishment in the former colonies: this was a
grossly distorted and inaccurate view. Nor for the most part did those
with whom I dealt in these countries see Britain in that light. Sweep
away some of the rhetoric and with the exception of certain issues,
like relations with South Africa, you will find that no country is as
trusted in every continent as Britain. In 1981 I began to make more
systematic use of these relationships to promote the interests of Britain
and the wider objectives of the West.
On Wednesday 15 April 1981 I began a visit to India. I had visited
the country twice and met Mrs Indira Gandhi, India’s Prime Minister,
three times before. However, the strategic importance of India was
now greater. India had been making economic progress, particularly in
the crucial sector of agriculture. It was one of the leading countries in
the non-aligned movement — still more so since the death of Marshal
Tito. That group of nations was itself more important to us because of
its attitude to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. India could be an
even more powerful source of difficulty than benefit if she chose. Her
traditionally closer relations with Russia and hostility to Pakistan, at a
time when the latter was the main base for the Afghan anti-communist
guerillas, meant that the West had to be sensitive to the Indian
Government’s feelings and needs. As regards bilateral relations, there
was also the thorny question of the new and much misrepresented
British Nationality Bill, which was a part of our proposals to limit
future large-scale immigration to Britain — not least immigration from
the Indian sub-continent.
My talks with Mrs Gandhi were interesting, but largely inconclusive.
Much of the time of the Indian Cabinet seemed to be spent in
allocating contracts — not perhaps too surprising in a socialist country
— whereas I was more concerned with international questions. I did
not manage to persuade Mrs Gandhi to condemn the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, as I would have liked. She put up the standard excuses,
but she was clearly embarrassed by it. I never succeeded in drawing
Mrs Gandhi or her successors away from India’s traditional alliance
with the Soviet Union until the collapse of communism, or in drawing
her closer to America. But we established a good Anglo-Indian
working relationship in Commonwealth affairs, and on the
practicalities of Third World aid, where she had a much more hardheaded grasp of what was required than most other Third World
leaders. This good relationship was not soured for long by the dispute
over the British Nationality Bill. She pressed strongly for amendments
to it that would have permitted more Indian families to be admitted to

Britain: I stood my ground in defence of the bill. My impression was
that although the attack was pressed home privately and publicly — at
the closing press conference I was faced with hostile questioning —
Mrs Gandhi was herself largely responding to public pressure.
I liked and respected Mrs Gandhi. Her policies had been more than
high-handed, but only a strong figure with a powerful personality
could hope successfully to rule India. Mrs Gandhi was also — perhaps
it is not just myth to see this as a female trait — immensely practical.
For example, she always insisted that what India required was basic —
what to some seemed primitive — means of assistance to allow its
peasants to produce more food. Like me, she understood the immense
benefits which science could bring and indeed was already bringing in
new varieties of grain and techniques of cultivation. Her weak spot
was that she never grasped the importance of the free market.
Apart from my talks with Mrs Gandhi and others, I saw three
different aspects of the new India. On Thursday I addressed the Indian
Parliament. On Friday I visited an Indian village where the efficiency
of peasant agriculture was being transformed. On Saturday I walked
around the Bombay Atomic Research Centre. The Indian visit was, I
felt, not only predictably fascinating; slightly less predictably, though
without any dramatic developments, it had been a success. I was sorry
to leave India so soon: each visit makes me want to return for an
extended stay.
On Sunday I left for Saudi Arabia and the Gulf. I had to have clothes
specially made for this visit because it was important to conform to
the customs of these conservative Muslim societies. Contrary to what
one might have thought, they were in no way disconcerted to meet
their first western woman prime minister. Later I discovered how
important the wives of leading Arab figures are. Indeed, many of these
women are highly cultivated, very well educated and well informed.
Their influence is greatly underrated in the West and an evening’s
conversation with them is a highly stimulating occasion.
I was the first ever British prime minister to visit these states. But
Britain’s links with the area were traditionally strong, dating back to
the days when we provided the defence of some of the Gulf states,
long before oil was discovered. I always regretted, even at the time,
the decision of Ted Heath’s Government not to reverse the Wilson
Government’s withdrawal of our forces and the severing of many of
our responsibilities east of Suez. Repeatedly, events have demonstrated
that the West cannot pursue a policy of total disengagement in this
strategically vital area. Britain has, however, continued to supply
equipment, training and advice.
In Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states I sought to reassure my hosts
that whatever decisions were made about a Rapid Deployment Force
(RDF) then being discussed, which some of them feared might pave
the way for direct military intervention in the Middle East, nothing of
the sort would occur without their knowledge and consent. The Iraq-

Iran conflict was continuing, though at a lower level of activity. No
one knew how serious the threat of Islamic fundamentalism might
become. Too overt a western presence might provide an excuse for it:
too little support from the West might provide an opportunity. The
Gulf Co-operation Council had been formed to bring together the
states in the region to guarantee their mutual security: this was clearly
a welcome development. It was also important that they should have
the right military equipment and be trained to use it. In this our old
defence links reinforced our commercial interest. Some British
aeroplanes and tanks were eminently suitable for this area.
Abu Dhabi, where I arrived on Tuesday 21 April, is the largest of the
members of the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Sheik Zaid, the Amir and
President of the UAE, spoke for all the world like an Arab poet and
was a man of great charm. He knew Pakistan well because like other
Gulf Arabs he regularly went there to hunt with his hawks. The Gulf
Arabs therefore learned much of interest about developments in
Pakistan and Afghanistan. We supplied the UAE with a good deal of
military equipment and advice, and we were keen to sell the excellent
Hawk Trainer and Ground Attack aircraft throughout the Gulf.
The other main UAE state is Dubai, where I arrived on Wednesday.
Its ruler was Sheik Rashid. When I arrived he was already on the
airport tarmac to greet me, even though he had already seen me in
Abu Dhabi. By this time he was elderly and unwell. But his powerful
features, above all his eyes, still conveyed shrewdness and courage.
There is a picture of the young Sheik on horseback, holding his sword
aloft, marching in from the desert to claim his land: it struck me that
the qualities of his generation would be difficult to repeat in the more
comfortable conditions of today.
Dubai is enchanting. Like the other Gulf states that I visited, it is full
of flowers, kept absolutely perfectly and tended every day. But it is
also a thriving port. Like Bahrain, but unlike some other cities on the
shores of the Gulf, it was established long before oil was discovered.
From here Arab traders sailed to the Red Sea and to the Indian Ocean.
I also visited Muscat in Oman. Its leader, Sultan Qaboos, has always
been one of Britain’s closest friends in the Gulf. Historic forts guard
the entrance to the port of Muscat. As elsewhere in the Gulf,
development has been very carefully controlled to blend in with the
traditional style of buildings. I discussed with the Sultan Oman’s
requirements for military equipment. Later when the price of oil fell
and Oman’s finances were somewhat less healthy, we suggested that
they should purchase the Ground Attack Hawk and Trainer rather than
the more expensive Tornado. The Sultan and I discussed the situation
in the Gulf and the Iran-Iraq War. He was always a source of valuable
information about events in Iran. We too were concerned that the war
remained confined to those two states and to the northern end of the
Gulf. We had stationed the three ships of the Armilla Patrol in the area
in 1980 to keep the sea lanes open. My talks with the Sultan and other

Gulf rulers laid the groundwork for later co-operation when the IranIraq War threatened Gulf shipping and, subsequently, when Iraq
invaded Kuwait.
My final visit on this occasion was to see Sheik Khalifa, the Emir of
Qatar. Qatar has the biggest natural deposits of gas anywhere in the
world and the country is very wealthy. I discussed the involvement of
British firms in the development of these resources.
The pattern of the visit, combining diplomacy, commerce and
private discussion would be repeated on many occasions in the years
ahead. Even on this busy trip I had not been able to visit all the
important players in the ‘great game’ of the Gulf. I would return in
September to do so, visiting Bahrain and Kuwait on my way to the
Commonwealth Conference in Melbourne.
THE OTTAWA G7
My second G7 summit — President Reagan’s and President
Mitterrand’s first — took place in Montebello, just outside Ottawa,
where I arrived on the afternoon of Sunday 19 July to be met by
Canada’s Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau. Montebello had been chosen
as the site of the conference because the G7 heads of government were
determined to try to avoid the relentless pressure from the media
which increasingly disrupted proceedings. After each afternoon session
Pierre Trudeau flew by helicopter back in to Ottawa to brief the
journalists. We enjoyed a kind of splendid isolation at the Château
Montebello, sometimes called the world’s biggest log cabin but in fact
a very luxurious hotel. It had also been decided to try to inject rather
more informality into discussions. Perhaps because of the presence of
Ronald Reagan, with his effortless amiability, we all called one
another by our Christian names. Something I liked less was the
decision that everyone should dress informally. In my experience this
kind of approach always presents more rather than fewer problems in
choosing what to wear. The Japanese, for example, wore the smartest
white ‘barbecue’ suits that I have ever seen — and looked all the more
formal beside the westerners in open-neck shirts and slacks. For my
part, like the Japanese, I made almost no concessions to informal
dress. I believe that the public really likes its leaders to look
businesslike and well turned out. I was glad that in retrospect this
degree of informality was not thought a success and so was not
repeated.
President Reagan was subject to some criticism at Montebello about
the level of US interest rates. He explained that he had inherited these
from his predecessor. ‘Give me time’, he said; ‘I want them down too.’
He was as good as his word on this. He also hoped to control the US
deficit by cuts in public spending, but that proved more intractable.
The deficit continued to rise until about 1985. The US deficit was to be
the one topic on which the President and I continued to be at odds,

until the latter half of his second term when it entered a sharply
declining path. My own experience of getting down deficits was that
you had to keep a very firm hand on the purse strings and say ‘no’ to
much public spending. If you are controlling public spending, you can
temporarily put up taxes because in those circumstances the revenue
will help to cut the deficit (and therefore interest rates). But if you are
increasing spending, then a tax increase will only serve to encourage
even more spending and thus may even increase the deficit. Given the
separation of powers in the US Constitution, which enabled Congress
to spend over and above the president’s wishes, holding taxes down
may be the only effective tool a president has to hold spending down.
So I came to have some sympathy with Ronald Reagan’s position.
Where the President and I were at one was when he argued for the
greatest possible international free trade. Trade also figured in others’
contributions. The Japanese were, as usual, sound on the principle of
free trade, but, in spite of pressure, definitely less willing to take
practical measures to open up their own markets.
Helmut Schmidt, who was known to be privately critical of the
policies of the new US Administration, argued for sound and orthodox
public finance and open trade, and I did the same in quite a long offthe-cuff speech. My contribution was, I suspect, the more convincing
because, as a result of the cuts in government borrowing in our 1981
budget, British interest rates had fallen by this time — even while we
were continuing to fight inflation.*
Perhaps my most useful discussion at Ottawa was at a private
meeting with President Reagan. Since we had met in Washington he
had survived injuries from an assassination attempt which would have
crippled many a younger man. But he looked fine. I briefed him on
events in Britain, putting both our economic problems and the recent
inner-city riots in perspective. As regards American relations with
Europe, I was becoming increasingly worried about some of the
Administration’s rhetoric: for example, I urged him to discourage talk
about a ‘rising tide of neutralism’ in Europe: while I agreed with his
underlying point, such warnings could all too easily prove selffulfilling. I took this opportunity to thank him warmly for his tough
stand against Irish terrorism and its NORAID supporters. It was good
to know that, however powerful the Irish republican lobby in the USA
might be, the Reagan Administration would not buckle before it.
MELBOURNE CHOGM AND VISIT TO PAKISTAN
Almost two months later the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting opened in Melbourne (on Wednesday 30 September).
The conference was overshadowed, as usual, by South African
issues. Robert Mugabe, with whom I had a separate meeting, was there
for the first time representing Zimbabwe. There was a good deal of
hostility to the new American Administration’s attitude to the problem

of Namibia. I was determined to hold the line so that the so-called
‘Contact Group’ of five nations, including the US, should continue to
be the means by which pressure for a settlement was exerted. At one
point Maurice Bishop, the Marxist Prime Minister of Grenada,
delivered an eloquent plea that we should send a clear message of
support to our brothers in Namibia, suffering under South African rule.
One of the other heads of government later suggested to me that
someone should ask Maurice Bishop about the number of his own
people, especially his country’s professional and middle class, now
held in Grenada’s prisons, put there by his Government. There was
also one of those arguments, which so frequently afflicted the
Commonwealth, about sporting ties with South Africa. The Springboks
had played in New Zealand amid scenes of disorder and Robert
Muldoon was bitterly condemned for his alleged breach of the
Gleneagles Agreement, by which international sporting relations with
South Africa were regulated. He put up a robust defence. At least with
the Rhodesian issue now settled, Britain was less the focus of
international criticism by the Commonwealth than on the previous
occasion, and the serious pressure for sanctions against South Africa
still lay in the future.
In my interventions during the conference, I acknowledged that
conditions for the developing world were undoubtedly difficult. They
had been hit hard both by the rise in the oil price and by the effects of
the recession on the western markets on which they relied. However, I
emphasized that wealth creation rather than international wealth
redistribution still had to come first — indeed more so than ever. I
also defended the British record on overseas aid, which was very good
when you looked further than the narrowly defined aid programme
and took into account both public and private sector loans and
investment. With myself and the heads of government of six other
Commonwealth countries due to attend the forthcoming international
conference on ‘North-South’ issues in Cancún, I thought it would be
well worth putting the facts on the record now.
While I was in Australia Ted Heath delivered a vitriolic speech in
Manchester attacking my policies. Oddly, perhaps, in view of his
record, Ted had become an advocate of the politics of ‘consensus’; or
perhaps less oddly, since these policies seemed to come down to state
intervention and corporatism. I was sent an advance copy of the
speech and used my Sir Robert Menzies Lecture at Monash University
to deliver a reply to him and to all the critics of my style of
government. It was, unbeknown to him, President Forbes Burnham of
Guyana who provided the inspiration for this in the course of the
weekend retreat which the heads of government spent away from
Melbourne in Canberra. In the course of this we were arguing about an
issue to be reported in the final communiqué which we were drafting.
At one point Forbes Burnham said that we must achieve a consensus. I
asked him what he meant by ‘consensus’ — a word of which I had

heard all too much — and he replied that ‘it is something you have if
you cannot get agreement.’ This seemed to me an excellent definition.
So in my lecture I inserted a passage which read:
To me consensus seems to be: the process of abandoning all beliefs,
principles, values and policies in search of something in which no one
believes, but to which no one objects; the process of avoiding the very issues
that have to be solved, merely because you cannot get agreement on the way
ahead. What great cause would have been fought and won under the banner
‘I stand for consensus’?

On the return journey I took the opportunity to visit Pakistan. I flew
to Islamabad to be met by President Zia. The war in Afghanistan was
at its height and it was arranged that I should visit one of the refugee
camps set up in Pakistan for fleeing Afghans. We flew to the Nasir
Bagh Afghan refugee camp by helicopter. It was large, but impeccably
clean, orderly and obviously well run. I spoke under a huge tent,
sheltered from the burning sun, while the refugees — men, women
and children — sat cross-legged on the ground. I told them of my
admiration for their refusal to ‘live under a godless communist system
which [was] trying to destroy [their] religion and [their]
independence’ and promised them my help. My speech was
interrupted from time to time as people rose to their feet to express
the words of approval, ‘Allah be praised’.
I had lunch in the garden of the beautiful old house of the Governor
at Peshawar. There, in the grounds of the house, I addressed a very
large meeting of tribal leaders from the surrounding areas. Then I
went by helicopter up to the Khyber Pass. I had been warned in
advance that, as an honoured guest, I would be presented with the
traditional sheep: I patted it appreciatively on the head and asked
them to keep it for me. From there I went up to the frontier with
Afghanistan itself, always busy despite its new status as a kind of
dividing line between communism and freedom. I gazed across into
the Soviet dominated lands beyond. A line of lorries was waiting to
come through from Afghanistan to Pakistan. Relations with the
Russian border guards on the Afghan side at this time were friendly
enough. They were taking a very close interest in everything that was
happening on our side. I reflected that Pakistan’s was an unsung story
of heroism, taking in hundreds of thousands of refugees and bordering
the world’s greatest military power. Though it was not a rich country,
as I later remarked to President Zia, all the Pakistani people I saw
looked healthy and well dressed. He said ‘no one is short of clothes or
food, thank God.’ Britain was already providing aid for the refugees.
But if Pakistan was to stand as a bulwark against communism it would
need still more help from the West.
CANCÚN NORTH-SOUTH SUMMIT

I had successfully persuaded President Reagan in the course of our
discussions in Washington of the importance of attending the Cancún
summit which was held that October in Mexico. I felt that, whatever
our misgivings about the occasion, we should be present, both to
argue for our positions and to forestall criticism that we were
uninterested in the developing world. The whole concept of ‘NorthSouth’ dialogue, which the Brandt Commission had made the
fashionable talk of the international community, was in my view
wrong-headed. Not only was it false to suggest that that there was a
homogeneous rich North which confronted a homogeneous poor
South: underlying the rhetoric was the idea that redistibution of world
resources rather than the creation of wealth was the way to tackle
poverty and hunger. Moreover, what the developing countries needed
more than aid was trade: so our first responsibility was — and still is
— to give them the freest possible access to our markets. Of course,
‘North-South’ dialogue also appealed to those socialists who wanted to
play down the fundamental contrast between the free capitalist West
and the unfree communist East.
The conference’s joint chairmen were President López-Portillo, our
Mexican host, and Pierre Trudeau who had stepped in for the
Chancellor of Austria, prevented by illness from attending. Twentytwo countries were represented. We were staying in one of those
almost overluxurious hotels which you so often seem to find in
countries where large numbers of people are living in appalling
poverty. Cancün was built in the 1970s, on a site (it is said) chosen by
computer as likely to have maximum appeal to foreign tourists. The
city was badly damaged by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988. So much for
information technology.
There is no immodesty in saying that Mrs Gandhi and I were the two
conference media ‘personalities’. India had just received the largest
loan yet given by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at less than
the market rate of interest. She and others naturally wanted more
cheap loans in the future. This was what lay behind the pressure,
which I was determined to resist, to place the IMF and the World Bank
directly under United Nations control. At one point in the proceedings
I engaged in a vigorous discussion with a group of heads of
government who could not see why I felt so strongly that the integrity
of the IMF and the World Bank would inevitably be compromised by
such a move, which would do harm rather than good to those who
were advocating it. In the end I put the point more bluntly: I said that
there was no way in which I was going to put British deposits into a
bank which was totally run by those on overdraft. They saw the point.
While I was at Cancün I also had a separate meeting with Julius
Nyerere, who was, as ever, charmingly persuasive, but equally
misguided and unrealistic about what was wrong with his own country
and, by extension, with so much of black Africa. He told me how
unfair the IMF conditions for extending credit to him were: they had

told him to bring Tanzania’s public finances into order, cut protection
and devalue his currency to the much lower level the market reckoned
it worth. Perhaps at this time the IMF’s demands were somewhat too
rigorous: but he did not see that changes in this direction were
necessary at all and in his own country’s long-term interests. He also
complained of the effects of droughts and the collapse of his country’s
agriculture — none of which he seemed to connect with the pursuit of
misguided socialist policies, including collectivizing the farms.
The process of drafting the communiqué itself was more than
usually fraught. An original Canadian draft was in effect rejected; and
Pierre Trudeau left it largely to the rest of us, making clear that he
thought our efforts rather less good than his own. I spent much of this
time seeking to sort out drafting points with the Americans, who
continued until almost the last moment to have reservations about the
text.
The summit was a success — though not really for any of the
reasons publicly given. At its conclusion there was, of course, the
expected general — and largely meaningless — talk about ‘global
negotiations’ on North-South issues. A special ‘energy affiliate’ to the
World Bank was to be set up. But what mattered to me was that the
independence of the IMF and the World Bank were maintained.
Equally valuable, this was the last of such gatherings. The intractable
problems of Third World poverty, hunger and debt would not be
solved by misdirected international intervention, but rather by
liberating enterprise, promoting trade — and defeating socialism in all
its forms.
Before I left Mexico, I had one more item of business to transact.
This was to sign an agreement for the building of a huge new steel
plant by the British firm of Davy Loewy. Like other socialist countries,
the Mexicans wrongly thought that large prestige manufacturing
projects offered the best path to economic progress. However, if that
was what they wanted, then I would at least try to see that British
firms benefited. The ceremony required my going to Mexico City the
night before. I stayed at the residence of the British Ambassador,
Crispin Tickell. While I was there at dinner the chandeliers started
swinging and the floor moved; there was nowhere you could put your
feet. At first I thought that I must have been affected by the altitude,
even though I had had no difficulty in my earlier days on skiing
holidays. But I was reassured by our ambassador who was sitting
beside me: ‘No’, he said, ‘it’s just an earthquake.’
Other earthquakes were sending out tremors that year. Before I left
for the international visits chronicled in this chapter, I had been all too
aware of the significance for the Cold War of the stationing of Cruise
and Pershing missiles in Europe. If it went ahead as planned, the
Soviet Union would suffer a real defeat; if it was abandoned in
response to the Soviet sponsored ‘peace offensive’, there was a real
danger of a decoupling of Europe and America. My meetings with

President Reagan had persuaded me that the new Administration was
apprised of these dangers and determined to combat them. But a
combination of exaggerated American rhetoric and the perennial
nervousness of European opinion threatened to undermine the good
transatlantic relationship that would be needed to guarantee that
deployment went ahead. I saw it as Britain’s task to put the American
case in Europe since we shared their analysis but tended to put it in
less ideological language. And this we did in the next few years.
But there was a second front in the Cold War — that between the
West and the Soviet-Third World axis. My visits to India, Pakistan, the
Gulf, Mexico and Australia for the Commonwealth Conference brought
home to me how badly the Soviets had been damaged by their
invasion of Afghanistan. It had alienated the Islamic countries en bloc,
and within that bloc strengthened conservative pro-western regimes
against radical states like Iraq and Libya. Traditional Soviet friends
like India, on the other hand, were embarrassed. Not only did this
enable the West to forge its own alliance with Islamic countries
against Soviet expansionism; it also divided the Third World and so
weakened the pressure it could bring against the West on international
economic issues. In these circumstances, countries which had long
advocated their own local form of socialism, to be paid for by western
aid, suddenly had to consider a more realistic approach of attracting
western investment by pursuing free-market policies — a small
earthquake as yet, but one that would transform the world economy
over the next decade.

Our three-month rate was 13 per cent. By contrast, interest rates in the US stood at
18 per cent and in France, Italy and Canada between 18 and 20 per cent. German
interest rates, at a nominal 13 per cent, were very high indeed in real terms — and still
the deutschmark had depreciated by between 40 and 45 per cent against the US dollar
in the previous twelve months.
*

CHAPTER VII

The Falklands War: Follow the Fleet
The attempts by diplomacy and the sending of the task force to regain
the Falkland Islands — to the end of April 1982

BACKGROUND
Nothing remains more vividly in my mind, looking back on my years
in No. 10, than the eleven weeks in the spring of 1982 when Britain
fought and won the Falklands War. Much was at stake: what we were
fighting for eight thousand miles away in the South Atlantic was not
only the territory and the people of the Falklands, important though
they were. We were defending our honour as a nation, and principles
of fundamental importance to the whole world — above all, that
aggressors should never succeed and that international law should
prevail over the use of force. The war was very sudden. No one
predicted the Argentine invasion more than a few hours in advance,
though many predicted it in retrospect. When I became Prime Minister
I never thought that I would have to order British troops into combat
and I do not think I have ever lived so tensely or intensely as during
the whole of that time.
The significance of the Falklands War was enormous, both for
Britain’s self-confidence and for our standing in the world. Since the
Suez fiasco in 1956, British foreign policy had been one long retreat.
The tacit assumption made by British and foreign governments alike
was that our world role was doomed steadily to diminish. We had
come to be seen by both friends and enemies as a nation which lacked
the will and the capability to defend its interests in peace, let alone in
war. Victory in the Falklands changed that. Everywhere I went after
the war, Britain’s name meant something more than it had. The war
also had real importance in relations between East and West: years
later I was told by a Russian general that the Soviets had been firmly
convinced that we would not fight for the Falklands, and that if we did
fight we would lose. We proved them wrong on both counts, and they
did not forget the fact.
Beginning in the summer of 1982, only weeks after the war, I wrote
down my detailed recollection of events as I had lived through them at
the centre of government. I finished the story at Chequers over Easter
1983. It was still etched in my mind, and I had all the records to hand.
The task took some time to complete; it is a long and complicated
story. Parts of it will have to remain secret for a considerable time to
come, but it is upon my personal memoir that I have based this
account.

The first recorded landing on the Falklands was made in 1690 by
British sailors, who named the channel between the two principal
islands ‘Falkland’s Sound’ in honour of the Treasurer of the Navy,
Viscount Falkland. Britain, France and Spain each established
settlements on the islands at various times during the eighteenth
century. In 1770 a quarrel with Spain caused the British Government
of the day to mobilize the fleet and a naval task force was prepared,
though never sent: on this occasion, a diplomatic solution was found.
The islands had obvious strategic importance, possessing several
good harbours within 500 miles of Cape Horn. In the event that the
Panama Canal is ever closed their significance would be considerable.
But it must be admitted that the Falklands were always an improbable
cause for a twentieth-century war.
The Argentine invasion of the Falklands took place 149 years after
the beginning of formal British rule there, and it seems that the
imminence of the 150th anniversary was an important factor in the
plotting of the Argentine Junta. Since 1833 there has been a
continuous and peaceful British presence on the islands. Britain’s legal
claim in the present day rests on that fact, and on the desire of the
settled population — which is entirely of British stock — to remain
British. The principle of ‘self-determination’ has become a fundamental
component of international law, and is enshrined in the UN Charter.
British sovereignty has strong legal foundations, and the Argentinians
know it.
Some 800 miles to the south-east of the Falklands lies South
Georgia, and 460 miles further out, the South Sandwich Islands. Here
the Argentine claim is even more dubious. These islands are
dependencies of the United Kingdom, though they are administered
from the Falklands. Their climate is severe and they have no settled
population. No state claimed them before British annexation in 1908
and there has been continuous British administration since that time.
My first involvement with the Falklands issue came very early in the
life of the 1979 Parliament. It was clear that there were only two ways
in which the prosperity of the Falkland Islanders could be achieved.
The more obvious and attractive approach was by promoting the
development of economic links with neighbouring Argentina. Yet this
ran up against the Argentine claim that the Falklands and the
dependencies were part of their sovereign territory. Ted Heath’s
Government had signed an important Communications Agreement in
1971 establishing air and sea links between the islands and the
mainland, but further progress in that direction had been blocked by
the Argentinians unless sovereignty was also discussed. Consequently
it was argued that some kind of accommodation with Argentina would
have to be reached on the question of sovereignty. Arguments of this
kind led Nick Ridley (the responsible minister) and his officials at the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) to advance the so-called
‘lease-back’ arrangement, under which sovereignty would pass to

Argentina but the way of life of the islanders would be preserved by
the continuation of British administration. I disliked this proposal, but
Nick and I both agreed that it should be explored, subject always to
the requirement that the islanders themselves should have the final
word. We could not agree to anything without their consent: their
wishes must be paramount.
There was, however, another option — far more costly and, on the
face of it, at least as risky. We could implement the recommendations
of the long-term economic survey produced in 1976 by the former
Labour minister, Lord Shackleton, and one recommendation in
particular — the enlargement of the airport and lengthening of the
runway. Notwithstanding the cost, such a commitment would have
been seen as evidence of the British Government’s determination to
have no serious talks about sovereignty and it would have increased
our capacity to defend the islands, since a longer runway would have
allowed for rapid reinforcement by air. This in turn might have
provoked a swift Argentine military response. Unsurprisingly, no
government — Labour or Conservative — was prepared to act while
there seemed any possibility of an acceptable solution and,
accordingly, lease-back had become the favoured option.
However, as I rather expected, none of these diplomatic arguments
in favour of lease-back had much appeal to the islanders themselves.
They would have nothing to do with such proposals. They distrusted
the Argentine dictatorship and were sceptical of its promises. But more
than that, they wanted to remain British. They made this abundantly
clear to Nick Ridley when he twice visited them to learn their views.
The House of Commons too was noisily determined that the islanders’
wishes should be respected. Lease-back was killed. I was not prepared
to force the islanders into an arrangement which was intolerable to
them — and which I in their position would not have tolerated either.
However, what all this meant for the future of the Falklands in the
longer term was less clear. The Government found itself with very
little room for manoeuvre. We were keen, if we could, to keep talking
to the Argentinians, but diplomacy was becoming increasingly
difficult. The Argentinians had already shown that they were not
above taking direct action. In 1976 they had established and had
maintained since a military presence on Southern Thule in the South
Sandwich Islands, which the Labour Government did nothing to
remove and which ministers did not even reveal to the House of
Commons until 1978.
Then, in December 1981, there was a change of government in
Buenos Aires. A new three-man military Junta replaced the previous
military government, with General Leopoldo Galtieri as President.
Galtieri relied on the support of the Argentine Navy, whose
Commander-in-Chief, Admiral Anaya, held particularly hardline views
on the Argentine claim to the ‘Malvinas’.

Cynically, the new Junta continued negotiations for a few months.
There were talks in New York at the end of February 1982 which
seemed to go well. But then the Argentinian line hardened abruptly.
With hindsight this was a turning point. But in judging our response to
the new Junta it is important to remember how much aggressive
rhetoric there had already been in the past, none of it coming to
anything. Moreover, based on past experience our view was that
Argentina was likely to follow a policy of progessively escalating the
dispute, starting with diplomatic and economic pressures. Contrary to
what was said at the time, we had no intelligence until almost the last
moment that Argentina was about to launch a full-scale invasion. Nor
did the Americans: in fact Al Haig later told me that they had known
even less than we had.
A factor in all this was the American Administration’s policy of
strengthening ties with Argentina as part of its strategy of resisting
Cuban-based communist influence in Central and South America. It
later became clear that the Argentinians had gained a wildly
exaggerated idea of their importance to the United States. They
convinced themselves on the eve of the invasion that they need not
take seriously American warnings against military action, and became
more intransigent when diplomatic pressure was applied on them
afterwards to withdraw.
Could they have been deterred? It must be remembered that in
order to take action to deter Argentina militarily, given the vast
distance between Britain and the Falklands, we would have had to
have some three weeks’ notice. Further, to send down a force of
insufficient size would have been to subject it to intolerable risk.
Certainly, the presence of HMS Endurance — the lightly armed patrol
vessel which was due to be withdrawn under the 1981 Defence
Review proposals — was a military irrelevance. It would neither deter
nor repel any planned invasion. (Indeed, when the invasion occurred I
was very glad that the ship was at sea and not in Port Stanley: if she
had been, she would have been captured or blown out of the water.)
Most important perhaps is that nothing would have more reliably
precipitated a full-scale invasion, if something less had been planned,
than if we had started military preparations on the scale required to
send an effective deterrent. Of course with the benefit of hindsight, we
would always like to have acted differently. So would the
Argentinians. The truth is that the invasion could not have been
foreseen or prevented. This was the main conclusion of the Committee
of Inquiry, chaired by Lord Franks, which we set up to examine the
way we had handled the dispute in the run-up to the invasion. The
committee had unprecedented access to government papers, including
those of the intelligence services. Its report ends with the words: ‘we
would not be justified in attaching any criticism or blame to the
present Government for the Argentine Junta’s decision to commit its
act of unprovoked aggression in the invasion of the Falkland Islands

on 2 April 1982.’
It all began with an incident on South Georgia. On 20 December
1981 there had been an unauthorized landing on the island at Leith
harbour by what were described as Argentine scrap metal dealers; we
had given a firm but measured response. The Argentinians
subsequently left and the Argentine Government claimed to know
nothing about it. The incident was disturbing, but not especially so. I
was more alarmed when, after the Anglo-Argentine talks in New York,
the Argentine Government broke the procedures agreed at the meeting
by publishing a unilateral communiqué disclosing the details of
discussion, while simultaneously the Argentine press began to
speculate on possible military action before the symbolically important
date of January 1983. On 3 March 1982 I minuted on a telegram from
Buenos Aires: ‘we must make contingency plans’ — though, in spite of
my unease, I was not expecting anything like a full-scale invasion,
which indeed our most recent intelligence assessment of Argentine
intentions had discounted.
On 20 March we were informed that the previous day the Argentine
scrap metal dealers had made a further unauthorized landing on South
Georgia, again at Leith. The Argentine flag had been raised and shots
fired. Again in answer to our protests the Argentine Government
claimed to have no prior knowledge. We first decided that HMS
Endurance should be instructed to remove the Argentinians, whoever
they were. But we tried to negotiate with Argentina a way of resolving
what still seemed to be an awkward incident rather than a precursor of
conflict, so we subsequently withdrew our instructions to Endurance
and ordered the ship to proceed instead to the British base at
Grytviken, the main settlement on the island.
WEEK ONE
Yet as March drew to a close with the incident still unresolved we
became increasingly concerned. On Sunday evening, 28 March, I rang
Peter Carrington from Chequers to express my anxiety at the situation.
He assured me that he had already made a first approach to Al Haig,
the US Secretary of State, asking him to bring pressure to bear. The
following morning Peter and I met at RAF Northolt on our way to the
European Council at Brussels, and discussed what further steps we
should take. We agreed to send a nuclear-powered submarine to
reinforce HMS Endurance and to make preparations to send a second
submarine. I was not too displeased when the following day news of
the decision leaked. The submarine would take two weeks to get to the
South Atlantic, but it could begin to influence events straight away.
My instinct was that the time had come to show the Argentines that
we meant business.
In the late afternoon of Tuesday 30 March I returned from Brussels.
By that time Peter Carrington had already left on an official visit to

Israel; his absence was unfortunate. The Foreign Office and the
Ministry of Defence had been working to prepare up-to-date
assessments and review the diplomatic and military options. The
following day — Wednesday 31 March — I made my statement to the
House reporting on the Brussels summit, but my mind was focused on
what the Argentinians were intending and on what our response
should be. The advice we received from intelligence was that the
Argentine Government were exploring our reactions, but that they had
not contrived the landing on South Georgia and that any escalation
they might make would stop short of full-scale invasion. However, we
knew that they were unpredictable and unstable, and that a
dictatorship might not behave in ways we would consider rational. By
now I was deeply uneasy. Yet still I do not think that any of us
expected an immediate invasion of the Falklands themselves.
I shall not forget that Wednesday evening. I was working in my
room at the House of Commons when I was told that John Nott
wanted an immediate meeting to discuss the Falklands. I called people
together. In Peter Carrington’s absence Humphrey Atkins and Richard
Luce attended from the Foreign Office, with FCO and MoD officials.
(The Chief of Defence Staff was also away, in New Zealand.) John was
alarmed. He had just received intelligence that the Argentinian Fleet,
already at sea, looked as if they were going to invade the islands on
Friday 2 April. There was no ground to question the intelligence. John
gave the MoD’s view that the Falklands could not be retaken once they
were seized. This was terrible, and totally unacceptable. I could not
believe it: these were our people, our islands. I said instantly: ‘if they
are invaded, we have got to get them back.’
At this dark moment comedy intervened. The Chief of the Naval
Staff, Sir Henry Leach, was in civilian dress, and on his way to the
meeting had been detained by the police in the Central Lobby of the
House of Commons. He had to be rescued by a whip. When he finally
arrived, I asked him what we could do. He was quiet, calm and
confident: ‘I can put together a task force of destroyers, frigates,
landing craft, support vessels. It will be led by the aircraft carriers
HMS Hermes and HMS Invincible. It can be ready to leave in forty-eight
hours.’ He believed such a force could retake the islands. All he
needed was my authority to begin to assemble it. I gave it him, and he
left immediately to set the work in hand. We reserved for Cabinet the
decision as to whether and when the task force should sail.
Before this, I had been outraged and determined. Now my outrage
and determination were matched by a sense of relief and confidence.
Henry Leach had shown me that if it came to a fight the courage and
professionalism of Britain’s armed forces would win through. It was
my job as Prime Minister to see that they got the political support they
needed. But first we had to do everything possible to prevent the
appalling tragedy, if it was still humanly possible to do so.

Our only hope now lay with the Americans — friends and allies, and
people to whom Galtieri, if he was still behaving rationally, should
listen. At the meeting we drafted and sent an urgent message to
President Reagan asking him to press Galtieri to draw back from the
brink. This the President immediately agreed to do.
At 9.30 on Thursday morning, 1 April, I held a Cabinet, earlier than
usual so that a meeting of the Overseas and Defence Committee of the
Cabinet (OD) could follow it before lunch. The latest assessment was
that an Argentine assault could be expected about midday our time on
Friday. We thought that President Reagan might yet succeed.
However, Galtieri refused altogether at first to take the President’s
call. He deigned to speak to the President only when it was too late to
stop the invasion. I was told of this outcome in the early hours of
Friday morning and I knew then that our last hope had now gone.
But how seriously did the Argentinians take American warnings
anyway? On the evening of Friday 2 April as the invasion was
proceeding, the US Ambassador to the United Nations, Mrs
Kirkpatrick, was attending a gala dinner given by the Argentinian
Ambassador in her honour. As our ambassador later asked her: how
would Americans have felt if he had dined at the Iranian Embassy the
night that the American hostages were seized in Tehran?
Unfortunately the attitudes of Mrs Kirkpatrick and some other
members of the US Administration were at this point of considerable
importance.
At 9.45 on Friday morning Cabinet met again. I reported that an
Argentine invasion was now imminent. We would meet later in the
day to consider once more the question of sending a task force —
though to my mind the issue by this stage was not so much whether
we should act, but how.
Communications with the Falklands were often interrupted due to
atmospheric conditions. On Friday morning the Governor of the
Falklands — Rex Hunt — sent a message telling us that the invasion
had begun, but it never got through. (Indeed, the first contact I had
with him after the invasion was when he reached Montevideo in
Uruguay, where the Argentinians flew him and a number of other
senior people, on Saturday morning.) It was, in fact, the captain of a
British Antarctic Survey vessel who intercepted a local Falkland Island
ham radio broadcast and passed on the news to the Foreign Office. My
private secretary brought me final confirmation while I was at an
official lunch.
By now discussion was taking place all over Whitehall about every
aspect of the campaign, including the application of economic and
other sanctions against Argentina. Feverish military preparations were
under way. The army was preparing its contribution. A naval task
force was being formed, partly from ships currently at Gibraltar and
partly from those in British ports. The Queen had already made it clear

that Prince Andrew, who was serving with HMS Invincible, would be
joining the task force: his grandfather, King George VI, had fought at
the Battle of Jutland and then as now there could be no question of a
member of the royal family being treated differently from other
servicemen.
Cabinet met for the second time that day at 7.30 in the evening
when the decision was made to send the task force. What concerned us
most at this point was the time it would take to arrive in the
Falklands. We believed, rightly, that the Argentinians would pile in
men and material to make it as difficult as possible for us to dislodge
them. And all the time the weather in the South Atlantic would be
worsening as the bitter winds and violent storms of the southern
winter approached.
More immediate and more manageable was the problem of how to
deal with public opinion at home in the intervening period. Support
for the despatch of the task force was likely to be strong, but would it
fall away as time went on? In fact, we need not have worried too
much about that. Ships were constantly being chartered and
negotiations — above all Al Haig’s shuttle diplomacy — continued.
Our policy was one which people understood and endorsed. Public
interest and commitment remained strong throughout.
One particular aspect of this problem, though, does rate a mention.
We decided to allow defence correspondents on the ships who
reported back during the long journey. This produced vivid coverage
of events. But there was always a risk of disclosing information which
might be useful to the enemy. I also became very unhappy at the
attempted ‘even-handedness’ of some of the comment, and the chilling
use of the third-person — talk of ‘the British’ and ‘the Argentinians’ on
our news programmes.
It was also on Friday 2 April that I received advice from the Foreign
Office which summed up the flexibility of principle characteristic of
that department. I was presented with the dangers of a backlash
against the British expatriates in Argentina, problems about getting
support in the UN Security Council, the lack of reliance we could place
on the European Community or the United States, the risk of the
Soviets becoming involved, the disadvantage of being looked at as a
colonial power. All these considerations were fair enough. But when
you are at war you cannot allow the difficulties to dominate your
thinking: you have to set out with an iron will to overcome them. And
anyway what was the alternative? That a common or garden dictator
should rule over the Queen’s subjects and prevail by fraud and
violence? Not while I was Prime Minister.
While military preparations were in train the focus now turned to
public debate in the United Nations Security Council. At the beginning
of April we had one short-term and several long-term diplomatic
objectives. In the short term we needed to win our case against
Argentina in the UN Security Council and to secure a resolution

denouncing their aggression and demanding withdrawal. On the basis
of such a resolution we would find it far easier to win the support of
other nations for practical measures to pressurize Argentina. But in the
longer term we knew that we had to try to keep our affairs out of the
UN as much as possible. With the Cold War still under way, and given
the anti-colonialist attitude of many nations at the UN, there was a
real danger that the Security Council might attempt to force
unsatisfactory terms upon us. If necessary we could veto such a
resolution, but to do so would diminish international support for our
position. This remained a vital consideration throughout the crisis. The
second long-term goal was to ensure maximum support from our
allies, principally the US, but also members of the EC, the
Commonwealth and other important western nations. This was a task
undertaken at head of government level, but an enormous burden fell
on the FCO and vast numbers of telegrams crossed my desk during
those weeks. No country was ever better served than Britain by our
two key diplomats at this time: Sir Anthony Parsons, Britain’s UN
Ambassador and Sir Nicholas (Nico) Henderson, our ambassador in
Washington; both possessed precisely those qualities of intelligence,
toughness, style and eloquence that the situation required.
At the UN Tony Parsons, on the eve of the invasion, was busy
outmanoeuvring the Argentinians. The UN Secretary-General had
called on both sides to exercise restraint: we responded positively, but
the Argentinians remained silent. On Saturday 3 April, Tony Parsons
managed a diplomatic triumph in persuading the Security Council to
pass what became Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 502,
demanding an immediate and unconditional withdrawal by the
Argentinians from the Falklands. It had not been easy. The debate was
bitter and complex. We knew that the old anti-colonialist bias of the
UN would incline some Security Council members against us, were it
not for the fact that there had been a flagrant act of aggression by the
Argentinians. I was particularly grateful to President Mitterrand who,
with the leaders of the Old Commonwealth, was among the staunchest
of our friends and who telephoned me personally to pledge support on
Saturday. (I was to have many disputes with President Mitterrand in
later years, but I never forgot the debt we owed him for his personal
support on this occasion and throughout the Falklands crisis.) France
used her influence in the UN to swing others in our favour. I myself
made a last-minute telephone call to King Hussein of Jordan, who also
came down on our side. He is an old friend of Britain. I told him our
difficulty; I did not have to go into lengthy explanations to persuade
him to cast Jordan’s vote on our side. He began the conversation by
asking simply: ‘what can I do for you Prime Minister?’ In the end we
were delighted to have the votes we needed for the Resolution and to
avoid a veto from the Soviet Union. But we knew that this was a
fragile achievement, and we had no illusions as to who would be left
to remove the aggressor when all the talking was done: it would be us.

The debate in the House of Commons that Saturday is another very
powerful memory.
I opened the debate. It was the most difficult I ever had to face. The
House was rightly angry that British territory had been invaded and
occupied, and many members were inclined to blame the Government
for its alleged failure to foresee and forestall what had happened. My
first task was to defend us against the charge of unpreparedness.
Far more difficult was my second task: convincing MPs that we
would respond to Argentina’s aggression forcefully and effectively. I
gave an explanation of what had happened and made very clear what
we intended to do. I said:
I must tell the House that the Falkland Islands and their dependencies
remain British territory. No aggression and no invasion can alter that simple
fact. It is the Government’s objective to see that the islands are freed from
occupation and are returned to British administration at the earliest possible
moment.
The people of the Falklands Islands, like the people of the United
Kingdom, are an island race … They are few in number, but they have the
right to live in peace, to choose their own way of life and to determine their
own allegiance. Their way of life is British: their allegiance is to the Crown.
It is the wish of the British people and the duty of Her Majesty’s Government
to do everything that we can to uphold that right. That will be our hope and
our endeavour and, I believe, the resolve of every Member of the House.

My announcement that the task force was ready and about to sail
was greeted with growls of approval. But I knew that not everybody
was cheering the same thing. Some saw the task force as a purely
diplomatic armada that would get the Argentinians back to the
negotiating table. They never intended that it should actually fight. I
needed their support for as long as possible, for we needed to
demonstrate a united national will both to the enemy and to our allies.
But I felt in my bones that the Argentinians would never withdraw
without a fight and anything less than withdrawal was unacceptable to
the country, and certainly to me.
Others shared my view that the task force would have to be used,
but doubted the Government’s will and stamina. Enoch Powell
expressed this sentiment most dramatically when he looked directly
across the Chamber at me and declared sepulchrally:
The Prime Minister, shortly after she came into office, received a soubriquet
as the ‘Iron Lady’. It arose in the context of remarks which she made about
defence against the Soviet Union and its allies; but there was no reason to
suppose that the Right Hon. Lady did not welcome and, indeed, take pride in
that description. In the next week or two this House, the nation and the
Right Hon. Lady herself will learn of what metal she is made. *

That morning in Parliament I could keep the support of both groups
by sending the task force out and by setting down our objectives: that
the islands would be freed from occupation and returned to British
administration at the earliest possible moment. I obtained the almost

unanimous but grudging support of a Commons that was anxious to
support the Government’s policy, while reserving judgement on the
Government’s performance.
But I realized that even this degree of backing was likely to be
eroded as the campaign wore on. I knew, as most MPs could not, the
full extent of the practical military problems. I foresaw that we would
encounter setbacks that would cause even some of a hawkish
disposition to question whether the game was worth the candle. And
how long could a coalition of opinion survive that was composed of
warriors, negotiators and even virtual pacifists? For the moment,
however, it had survived. We received the agreement of the House of
Commons for the strategy of sending the task force. And that was what
mattered.
I left the House, satisfied with the day’s results, prepared for more
difficult debates in the future, and generally in a mood of solemnity.
Indeed, from the moment I heard of the invasion, deep anxiety was
ever present.
Almost immediately I faced a crisis in the Government. John Nott,
who was under great strain, had delivered an uncharacteristically poor
performance in his winding-up speech. He had been very harshly
treated in the debate. He was held responsible by many of our
backbenchers for what had happened because of the Defence Review
which he had pioneered. This was unfair. The budget for conventional
naval forces (that is excluding the Trident programme) was £500
million higher — and also higher as a share of the defence budget —
than when we took office. Though the aircraft carrier HMS Invincible
was to be sold, this would not take place until the end of 1983, by
which time she would have been replaced by HMS Illustrious. Similarly
HMS Hermes was due to be replaced by HMS Ark Royal, ensuring that
the present aircraft carrier strength of the navy was continuously
maintained. But there was no doubt that the Party’s blood was up: nor
was it just John Nott they were after.
Peter Carrington defended the Government’s position that morning
in the House of Lords and had a reasonably good reception. But Peter
and John then attended a packed and angry meeting of Tory backbenchers shortly after the Commons debate. Here, Peter was at a
distinct disadvantage: as a peer he had struck up none of those
friendships and understandings with back-benchers on which all of us
have to rely when the pressure builds. As Ian Gow reported to me
afterwards, it was a very difficult meeting, and feelings had boiled
over.
WEEK TWO
The press over the weekend was very hostile. Peter Carrington was
talking about resigning. I saw him on Saturday evening, Sunday

morning and again in the evening. Both Willie Whitelaw and I did all
that we could to persuade him to stay. I felt that the country needed a
Foreign Secretary of his experience and international standing to see
us through the crisis. But there seems always to be a visceral desire
that a disaster should be paid for by a scapegoat. There is no doubt
that Peter’s resignation ultimately made it easier to unite the Party and
concentrate on recovering the Falklands: he understood this. Having
seen Monday’s press, in particular the Times leader, he decided that he
must go. Two other senior Foreign Office ministers also resigned:
Humphrey Atkins and Richard Luce. In a handwritten letter he wrote
to me on Tuesday 6 April, Peter said:
I think I was right to go. There would have been continual poison and such
advice as I gave you would have been questioned. The Party will now unite
behind you as it should have done last Saturday.
It has been a crowded and enjoyable three years and the spirited debates
we have sometimes had were productive and had no rancour.
Only one thing more. Though I have never pretended to agree with you
about everything, my admiration for your courage and determination and
resourcefulness is unbounded. You deserve to win through and if there is
anything I can do to help you have only to ask.

It was a characteristically generous and encouraging letter — and
these things matter when the skies are growing darker.
I also received a wonderful letter — one of a number over the years
— from Laurens van der Post, who pointed out that there was one
principle, more important even than sovereignty, at stake in the
dispute:
To appease aggression and evil is to connive at a greater aggression and evil
later on … If we fail to deal with the Fascist Argentine, the Russians will be
even more encouraged than they are already to nibble away with more and
more acts of aggression in what is left of a free world.

Of course, he was entirely right.
John Nott also wished to resign. But I told him straight that when
the fleet had put to sea he had a bounden duty to stay and see the
whole thing through. He therefore withdrew his letter on the
understanding that it was made public that his offer to resign had been
rejected. Whatever issues might have to be faced later as a result of
the full enquiry (which I announced on 8 April), now was the time to
concentrate on one thing only — victory. Meanwhile, I had to find a
new Foreign Secretary. The obvious choice was Francis Pym, who had
had the requisite experience of Foreign Affairs in Opposition and
Defence in Government. And so I appointed him, asking John Biffen to
take over his former position as Leader of the House of Commons.
Francis is in many ways the quintessential old style Tory: a country
gentleman and a soldier, a good tactician, but no strategist. He is a
proud pragmatist and an enemy of ideology; the sort of man of whom
people used to say that he would be ‘just right in a crisis’. I was to
have reason to question that judgement. Francis’s appointment

undoubtedly united the Party. But it heralded serious difficulties for
the conduct of the campaign itself.
It was also on Monday that I was able to talk face to face at No. 10
with Rex Hunt and the two marine commanders who had just arrived
from Uruguay. I asked him whether he had been aware that an
invasion was in the offing and he replied, ‘No: I thought it was just
another alarm of the kind we had had previously.’ He told me that
when he had received our message on the previous Wednesday he had
contacted one of the Argentine representatives of their airline on the
island who had assured him that as far as he knew nothing was afoot.
However, it seemed from what I was told by one of the marines that
other Argentinians had been reporting back on every detail and
movement from their airline office on the Falklands. Apparently the
local Argentine commander of the invasion force knew almost every
one of the names of the marines reinforcements who had been there
only a few days. The operation had, it seemed, been very well planned
with the first wave of Argentine troops coming from the landward
side. They did not, however, come out and fight but waited for
overwhelming armour and other forces to arrive. Our two marine
commanders were very anxious to get back to the islands. They were
subsequently flown to Ascension Island — the mid-Atlantic staging
post for the task force, vital to our operation — and subsequently took
the surrender at Government House when Port Stanley fell.
The Governor was superb throughout, dealing effectively with the
media, which was not always an easy task. He repeated again and
again that I had said in the House that our objective was the
restoration of British sovereignty and the return of British
administration and he was sure that I meant what I said. Of course, I
did. But there were many times in the coming negotiations when I
wondered whether I would indeed secure Rex Hunt’s return to the
Falklands.
On Tuesday 6 April there was a long Cabinet discussion of the crisis.
From the beginning, we were sure that the attitude of the United
States would be a key element in the outcome. The Americans could
do enormous damage to the Argentine economy if they wanted. I sent
a message to President Reagan urging the US to take effective
economic measures. But at the moment the Americans were not
prepared to do this. Nico Henderson had his first discussions with Al
Haig in which the main themes of their response over the next few
weeks were already clear. They had stopped arms sales. But they
would not ‘tilt’ too heavily against Argentina. To do so would deprive
them of influence in Buenos Aires. They did not want Galtieri to fall
and so wanted a solution that would save his face. There were clear
signs that they were contemplating a mediation between the two sides.
All of this was fundamentally misguided and Nico was very robust in
his reply. But in practice the Haig negotiations, which flowed from all
this, almost certainly worked in our favour by precluding for a time

even less helpful diplomatic intervention from other directions,
including the UN. In a crisis of this kind one finds any number of
people lining up to act as mediators, some motivated by nothing more
than a desire to cut a figure on the world stage.
That consideration lay in the future, however. At this stage the
Americans were anxious to achieve a settlement that would prevent
them having to choose between Britain, their natural ally, and their
interests in Latin America. I should add, though, that from the first
Caspar Weinberger, US Defence Secretary, was in touch with our
ambassador emphasizing that America could not put a NATO ally and
long-standing friend on the same level as Argentina and that he would
do what he could to help. America never had a wiser patriot, nor
Britain a truer friend.
It was at this Cabinet that I announced we were setting up OD(SA),
which became known to the outside world as ‘the War Cabinet’.
Formally, this was a sub-committee of OD, though several of its
members did not serve on that committee. Its exact membership and
procedure were influenced by a meeting I had with Harold Macmillan,
who came to see me at the House of Commons after Questions on
Tuesday 6 April to offer his support and advice as the country’s and
the Conservative Party’s senior ex-Prime Minister. His main
recommendation was to keep the Treasury — that is, Geoffrey Howe
— off the main committee in charge of the campaign, the diplomacy
and the aftermath. This was a wise course, but understandably
Geoffrey was upset. Even so I never regretted following Harold
Macmillan’s advice. We were never tempted to compromise the
security of our forces for financial reasons. Everything we did was
governed by military necessity. So the War Cabinet consisted of
myself, Francis Pym, John Nott, Willie Whitelaw as my deputy and
trusted adviser, and Cecil Parkinson, who not only shared my political
instincts but was brilliantly effective in dealing with public relations.
Sir Terence (now Lord) Lewin, Chief of Defence Staff, always attended.
So did Michael Havers, the Attorney-General, as the Government’s
legal adviser. Of course, we were constantly advised and supported by
FCO and MoD officials and by the military. It met every day, and
sometimes twice a day.
By the time of our first meeting the task force had already been
despatched with a speed and efficiency which astounded the world.
Millions watched on television as the two carriers sailed from
Portsmouth on Monday 5 April, and on that day and the following two
they were joined by a force of eleven destroyers and frigates, three
submarines, the amphibious assault ship HMS Fearless (crucial to the
landings), and numerous naval auxiliaries. Merchantmen of all kinds
were ‘taken up from trade’. Three thousand troops were initially
assigned to the operation — 3 Commando Brigade of the Royal
Marines, the 3rd Battalion of the Parachute Regiment and a unit of the
Air Defence Regiment. Several times in the course of the campaign we

had to revise upwards our estimate of the number of troops required
and send reinforcements. This first group left the UK, sailing on the
cruise ship Canberra, on Friday 9 April. It was not always understood
that to sail a large task force with troops halfway round the world,
with the intention of making opposed landings, required an enormous
logistical operation — both in the UK and at sea. In the end we sent
over 100 ships, carrying more than 25,000 men.
The Commander-in-Chief, Fleet, was Admiral Sir John Fieldhouse;
he took overall command of the task force from his base at Northwood
in West London, choosing Rear Admiral Sandy Woodward as the
operational commander of the surface ships in the force. (Our
submarines were controlled directly from Northwood by satellite.) I
have written elsewhere about Sandy Woodward: at that time I had not
yet met him, but I knew of his reputation as one of the cleverest men
in the navy. Admiral Fieldhouse’s land deputy was Major-General
Jeremy Moore of the Royal Marines. General Moore began the
campaign in Northwood, departing for the South Atlantic in May. His
deputy, who sailed with HMS Fearless in the first wave of ships, was
Brigadier Julian Thompson, of 3 Commando Brigade. Brigadier
Thompson was to have charge of our forces on the Falklands for a vital
period after the landing until General Moore’s arrival.
OD(SA) met twice on Wednesday 7 April. Throughout the war we
were confronted with the problem of managing the intricate
relationship between diplomatic and military requirements. I was
determined that the needs of our servicemen should have priority over
politics and it was on this day that we had to resolve our first problem
of this kind. Our nuclear powered submarines were due in the area of
the Falklands within the next few days. We would therefore shortly be
in a position to set up a 200-mile Maritime Exclusion Zone (MEZ) for
ships around the Falklands. * Should we announce it now? Or should
we postpone the announcement until after Al Haig’s imminent visit the
next day? In any case, for legal reasons we had to give several days’
notice before the MEZ could come into effect.
In fact Al Haig’s visit had to be postponed because of that day’s
Commons debate. At the War Cabinet which met at 7 o’clock that
evening there was a classic disagreement between the MoD and the
FCO on the timing of the announcement. We decided to go ahead
straight away, informing Al Haig of the decision shortly in advance.
John Nott made the announcement when he wound up the debate in
a speech which restored his standing and self-confidence. Not a voice
was raised against the MEZ and Jim Callaghan was heard to say
‘absolutely right’. It took effect in the early hours of Easter Monday
morning 12 April, by which time our submarines were in place to
enforce it. It is worth noting that never during the Falklands operation
did we say we would take action until we were in a position to do it. I
was determined that we should never allow our bluff to be called.

One other point in that day’s Commons debate is worth noting.
Keith Speed, the former Navy minister, argued that we could enforce a
blockade against the Argentinians on the Falklands. In fact, due to the
terrible weather conditions and the problems of keeping the task force
supplied and maintained so far from home, there was no way that this
could have been done.
All this time we were bringing as much pressure to bear on the
Argentinians as we could through diplomatic methods. I had sent
messages on 6 April to the heads of state and heads of government of
European Community countries, the US, Japan, Canada, Australia and
New Zealand. I asked them to support us against Argentina by banning
arms sales, banning all or some imports, ending export credit cover for
new commitments and giving no encouragement or incentive to their
banks to lend to Argentina. It had been suggested at first that I should
ask for a total import ban, but though that is what we wanted I
thought it bad tactics to press for too much at once. The responses
were now coming through. I have already mentioned those of the
United States and of France, and our success in the UN Security
Council. Helmut Schmidt assured me personally of West Germany’s
strong support. Not all the countries of the European Community were
as positive. There were close ties between Italy and Argentina. Though
opposing the use of force, the Spanish continued to support the
Argentine case and — no great surprise — the Irish caused us some
concern. Later it became clear that they were not to be relied upon.
However, initially the EC gave us all that we asked for, imposing an
embargo on Argentine imports from the middle of April for one
month. When the embargo came up for renewal in mid-May there
were considerable difficulties, but eventually a compromise was
reached by which Italy and Ireland were able to resume links with
Argentina while the other eight continued the embargo indefinitely.
The response of the Commonwealth, with the partial exception of
India, had been very supportive. In particular, Malcolm Fraser in
Australia banned all imports from Argentina, except those under
existing contracts. Bob Muldoon and New Zealand were, if anything,
even stronger in their support, later offering to lend us a frigate to
replace our own guardship in the Caribbean so that we could deploy it
where it was more urgently needed.
We were disappointed by Japan’s somewhat equivocal attitude.
Predictably, the Soviet Union increasingly leaned towards Argentina
and stepped up verbal attacks on our position. If we had returned to
the UN to seek a sanctions resolution we had no doubt that they would
have vetoed it.
Similarly, we were subject to a stream of vitriol from a number of
Latin American countries — as was the US — though, because of its
own long-standing disputes with Argentina, Chile was on our side. A
number of others were quietly sympathetic, whatever their public
stance: Argentina had made itself none too popular by its arrogance

towards the rest of Latin America. In this way action on the diplomatic
front supported the objectives of our task force as it sailed further into
the South Atlantic. And, of course, effective diplomacy would have
been impossible without the despatch of the task force. As Frederick
the Great once remarked, ‘diplomacy without arms is like music
without instruments.’
On Thursday 8 April Al Haig arrived in London for the first stage of
his long and tiring diplomatic shuttle. I had had a concise and, as it
turned out, extremely accurate account from Nico Henderson of the
propositions Mr Haig was likely to advance. We made it quite clear to
him — and he accepted that this was the line we would take — that he
was not being received in London as a mediator but as a friend and
ally, here to discuss ways in which the United States could most
effectively support us in our efforts to secure Argentine withdrawal
from the Falklands. Having had some initial discussions with Francis
Pym, he arrived at No. 10 for talks followed by a working dinner. His
team included Ed Streator from the US Embassy in London, General
Vernon Walters, Mr Haig’s special assistant — a powerful personality
and someone I particularly liked and respected — and Thomas Enders
who dealt with South American Affairs in the State Department. I was
joined by Francis, John, Terry Lewin, Sir Antony Acland (head of the
Foreign Office) and Clive Whitmore (my principal private secretary).
The discussions were lively and direct, to use the diplomatic jargon:
there was too much at stake for me to allow them to be anything else.
It was apparent from the beginning that, whatever might be said
publicly, Al Haig and his colleagues had come to mediate. He sought
to reassure me about the position of the United States. He said that the
US was not impartial but had to be cautious about its ‘profile’. The
Argentine Foreign minister had indicated that they might accept
Soviet assistance, which made the Americans extremely
uncomfortable. In his judgement the next seventy-two hours would be
the best time for negotiation as far as the Argentinians were
concerned. He told us that he had decided to visit Britain first because
he did not wish to go to Buenos Aires without a full understanding of
our approach.
That was my cue. I told Mr Haig that the issue was far wider than a
dispute between the United Kingdom and Argentina. The use of force
to seize disputed territory set a dangerous precedent. In that sense, the
Falklands mattered to many countries — to Germany, for example,
because of West Berlin, to France because of its colonial possessions,
to Guyana, a large part of whose territory was claimed by Venezuela.
(Later the FCO prepared me a brief for the Versailles G7 summit listing
current territorial disputes: it was a lengthy document.) We in Britain
had experience of the danger of appeasing dictators. As regards the
Soviet Union, I suspected that the Russians feared American
involvement as much as the Americans feared the reverse. The West
might be stretched, but so were the Soviets. I would be surprised if

they intervened actively. I asked what pressure the Americans could
bring to bear upon Galtieri? The reputation of the western world was
at stake. We wished to solve the matter by diplomatic means but we
would not negotiate under duress — withdrawal was a prior condition.
It became increasingly clear to me that Mr Haig was anxious not
only to avoid what he described as ‘a priori judgements about
sovereignty’ but that he was aiming at something other than the
British administration which I was publicly pledged to restore. The
whole of his approach rested on trying to persuade the two sides to
accept some kind of neutral ‘interim administration’ after Argentine
withdrawal to run the islands while their long-term future was
decided. He talked of an American, or perhaps Canadian, presence
while negotiations continued. I pointed out that this would mean that
the Argentines had gained from the use of force. I told him that British
sovereignty must continue and British administration be restored. Only
after this had happened could there be the possibility of negotiations,
and they would be subject to the overriding condition that the wishes
of the islanders were paramount.
Discussion over dinner covered very much the same area. I probed
what Mr Haig seemed to be proposing as regards the administration of
the islands after Argentine withdrawal had been achieved. He was
rather vague: but it still seemed to me that it would not be the British
administration to which we were pledged.
Mr Haig would now go to Buenos Aires to assess the Argentinian
position. He agreed a common line with us. We would both say to the
press that we wanted UNSCR 502 to be implemented as quickly as
possible and had discussed how the United States could help. He had
heard the British view of the situation and knew how strongly we felt,
but he should not give the slightest impression that our position had
changed in any way or that we were showing any flexibility.
In fact, Mr Haig may have looked back on our friendly
disagreements in London with something like nostalgia when he got to
Buenos Aires and began trying to negotiate with the Argentine Junta.
It became evident that the Junta itself was deeply divided and both
General Galtieri and the Foreign minister Sr. Costa Mendez seemed to
alter their position from hour to hour. At one stage Mr Haig thought
that he had won concessions, but as he was about to leave for England
on Easter Sunday, 11 April — indeed, as he was boarding the
aeroplane — Sr. Costa Mendez handed him a paper which appeared to
abrogate the concessions which, rightly or wrongly, he believed he
had won.
I held talks at Chequers about the Falklands over the Easter
weekend. On Good Friday Tony Parsons came to lunch and we
discussed the negotiating strategy. The next day Francis Pym, John
Nott, and Terry Lewin came down and we too had a working lunch. I
am glad that Chequers played a large part in the Falklands story.
Churchill had used it quite a lot during the Second World War and its

atmosphere helped to get us all together.
WEEK THREE
By Easter Monday the first ships of the task force had begun arriving
at Ascension Island, half way to the Falklands. The American team
returned to London on the morning of that day, 12 April. The carpets
were up at No. 10 for the annual spring clean and it looked a little as
if someone was moving house. This was, however, a false impression.
Al Haig began by giving an oral account of his talks in Buenos Aires.
He said that he had detected differences of view between the three
Argentinian Armed Services. The navy were looking for a fight.
However, the air force did not want a war, and the army were
somewhere in between. Enthusiasm for a fight turned out to be in
inverse proportion to fighting spirit. He had worked out a set of
proposals which he thought the Argentinians might be brought
eventually to accept. There were seven main elements:
• First, both Britain and Argentina would agree to
withdraw from the islands and a specified surrounding
area within a two-week period.
• Second, no further military forces were to be introduced
and forces withdrawn were to return to normal duties.
The Argentinians had wanted an undertaking from us to
keep our task force out of the South Atlantic altogether,
but Al Haig said that he had told them that this was
impossible and believed that they might be satisfied if
the agreement provided for British units to return to
normal duties.
• Third, there would be a Commission, in place of the
Governor, made up of United States, British and
Argentine representatives who would act together
(whether by unanimity or majority was not specified) to
ensure compliance with the agreement. For that
purpose they would each need to have observers. Each
member of the Commission could fly his flag at
headquarters.
• Fourth, economic and financial sanctions against
Argentina would be lifted.
•
Fifth, the traditional local administration of the islands
would be restored, including the re-establishment of the
Executive and Legislative Councils, to which Argentine
representatives from the tiny Argentine population in
the Falklands would be added. The Argentinians were
adamantly opposed to the return of our Governor.

• Sixth, the Commission would promote travel, trade and
communications between the islands and Argentina, but
the British Government would have a veto on its
operations.

• Finally, negotiations on a lasting settlement would be
pursued ‘consistently with the Purposes and Principles
of the United Nations Charter’. The United States had
apparently insisted on this because of the references in
it to the right of self-determination. It seemed that the
Argentinians would only have been prepared to agree to
this part of the proposals if they contained a date for
the conclusion of negotiations, which was suggested as
31 December 1982.
At this time, I did not attempt to reply to Al Haig’s proposals point
by point: I simply restated my belief in the principle of selfdetermination. If the Falkland Islanders chose to join Argentina, the
British Government would respect their decision. But, equally, the
Argentine Government should be prepared to accept an expressed wish
of the islanders to remain British. The Americans then left us for
ninety minutes, as we had agreed in advance, while we discussed the
proposals with the other members of the War Cabinet.
Al Haig’s proposals were full of holes but they also had some
attractions. If we could really get the Argentine forces off the islands
by conceding what seemed a fairly powerless commission, very limited
Argentine representation on each council — drawn from local
residents and not nominated by the Junta — and an Argentine flag
flown alongside others at Headquarters there was something to be said
for these ideas. However, on closer inspection there were formidable
difficulties. What security would there be for the islanders after the
interim period? Clearly, the United States would have to be asked to
guarantee the islands against renewed invasion. Then there were the
inescapable geographical realities. The Argentinians would remain
close to the Falklands; but if we had to withdraw to ‘normal areas’
where would our forces be? We must have the right to be at least as
close as the Argentine forces. In spite of the general reference to the
UN Charter, there was still nothing to make it clear that the islanders’
wishes must be paramount in the final negotiations. There must also
be no possibility of the Argentinians steadily increasing the number of
their people on the islands during the interim period so as to become
the majority — a serious worry, particularly if our people started to
leave, which they might well do in those circumstances.
At this point Francis Pym, John Nott and I rejoined Al Haig. I said
that I was very grateful for the tremendous amount of work which he
had done but that I had a number of questions. What did the
Americans envisage would happen if no final settlement had been
reached by 31 December 1982? My aim in asking was to discover

whether the United States was prepared to give a guarantee. The
answer was not entirely clear — nor did it become clearer with the
passage of time. I emphasized again the importance attached by the
House of Commons to the principle of self-determination for the
islanders. We would have to have some specific reference to Article
1(2) and Article 73 of the UN Charter on this matter, which enshrined
the principle of self-determination. We recognized, however, that
Argentina would place a different gloss upon the agreement from the
British Government. Al Haig accepted this.
On the matter of their flag, I told Al Haig that wherever else it flew,
it must not fly over the Governor’s house. He said that for the
Argentinians the governorship of the Falklands was a key issue: they
wanted to keep the Governor they had appointed after the invasion on
the island as a commissioner. I said that if they did that, the British
Government would have to appoint Rex Hunt as our commissioner. I
also raised the question of South Georgia where Britain had an
absolute title, quite distinct from its claim to the Falklands. AI Haig
saw no problem about this. (We regretted afterwards that we had ever
put South Georgia into the first proposals. But at the time there
seemed a possibility of getting the Argentines off without a battle and
they had occupied the island shortly after their invasion of the
Falklands themselves.)
However, the main issue was always bound to be the military one. I
knew that the only reason the Argentinians were prepared to negotiate
at all was because they feared our task force. I stressed that although
British submarines in the proposed demilitarized zone would leave as
the Argentine forces withdrew, the British task force must continue to
proceed southwards, though it would not enter the demilitarized zone.
This was essential: we could not afford to let the Argentinians invade a
second time. One concession I might be prepared to make was that the
task force could be stood off at a point no closer to the Falklands than
Argentine forces were based. Anything less would be unacceptable to
Parliament.
Shortly after this we adjourned for lunch and agreed to meet later in
the afternoon after we had looked in detail at the proposals and, with
advice from officials and the military, worked out our own detailed
amendments. In the meantime the American team had made use of a
direct secure line from No. 10 to the White House. As Al Haig’s
memoirs reveal, he had also rung the Argentine Foreign minister, on
hearing that the New York Times had just published the terms of the
document which Sr. Costa Mendez had handed him at the airport in
Buenos Aires, which were utterly inconsistent with the terms
presented to us. Understandably, Mr Haig now wanted to know
whether this document represented the Foreign minister’s suggestions
or the final and official word of the Junta.
Our two teams met once more just before 6 p.m. There were a
number of points to discuss; again, the single most important was the

position of the task force. Al Haig said that President Galtieri would
not survive if after the Argentinians had committed themselves to
withdrawing from the Falkland Islands in two weeks the British
newspapers continued to report that the task force was proceeding
south. The Americans were not asking for our fleet to be turned
around: but they were asking for it to be halted once an agreement
had been reached. I replied that I would not survive in the House of
Commons if I stopped the task force before Argentine withdrawal had
been completed. Nor would I be prepared to do it. I was ready to let
the troop ships proceed more slowly once an agreement had been
signed. But the main task force must maintain its progress towards the
Falklands Islands. I saw no reason to give Argentina the benefit of the
doubt. I was prepared to halt the task force at the same distance from
the Falklands as that between Argentina and the islands, but I could go
no further than that.
We argued until late into the evening. Argentina, starting from the
Communications Agreement of 1971, wanted their citizens to have the
same rights to reside on the islands, own property and so on, as the
Falklanders. They wanted the commission positively to promote that
state of affairs and to decide upon such matters. We fought the
proposal down on the grounds that the interim administration must
not change the nature of life on the islands. We finally agreed that we
would pursue further negotiations on a somewhat woolly text. There
were, however, some conditions which had to be made absolutely
clear — the withdrawal zones, the fact that the one Argentine
representative per council must be local, and that Argentinians on the
islands must have the same qualifying period for voting rights as the
Falklanders.
This was not, however, quite the end of Easter Monday. Just before
10 o’clock that night Al Haig telephoned me to say that Sr. Costa
Mendez had rung him to say that he saw no reason for the Secretary of
State to go to Buenos Aires again unless any agreement about the
Falkland Islands provided for the Governor to be appointed by the
Argentine Government and for the Argentine flag to continue to be
flown there. And if that was not possible, the Argentinians must have
assurances that at the end of negotiations with Britain there would be
a recognition of Argentine sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. Al
Haig was shattered. I had mixed feelings about this news, but I was
certainly not going to buckle under that sort of pressure. I told Mr
Haig on the telephone:
If those are the conditions, you cannot return [direct to Buenos Aires]; but it
has to be known publicly from your viewpoint that they’ve set those
conditions and that was why you said ‘we cannot have those, we cannot
therefore return.’ But it must be known from your viewpoint. Publicly.

Al Haig agreed; he was obviously very depressed.
Having decided not to go on to Buenos Aires, somewhat to our
surprise the following morning the Americans sought another meeting

with us. So our two teams met first thing. By this stage it was
becoming obvious that the proposals the Americans had presented to
us the previous day had no measure of Argentine approval. In fact, the
status of all these proposals was doubtful. The more closely I
questioned Al Haig on this point, the more uncertain it became. Since
the proposals had not been agreed with the Argentinians, even if we
accepted them, they might therefore not form the basis of a
settlement.
This fact was made painfully clear at the meeting that morning
when Mr Haig handed us a document embodying five points which he
described as essential to the Argentine position. As he himself said, the
practical effect of the Argentine tactics was to buy time. I always
thought that this was their main purpose in negotiating.
I was becoming impatient with all this. I said that it was essentially
an issue of dictatorship versus democracy. Galtieri wanted to be able
to claim victory by force of arms. The question now was whether he
could be diverted from his course by economic sanctions or, as I had
suspected all along, only by military force. Mr Haig replied that he had
made it abundantly clear to Argentina that if conflict developed the
United States would side with Britain. But did we wish to bring the
negotiations to an end today? He could say publicly that he was
suspending his own efforts, making it clear that this was due to
Argentine intransigence. But if he did so other less helpful people
might try to intervene. I was keenly aware of that and I also felt that
public opinion here required us not to give up on negotiations yet.
Later that day events took another bizarre turn. Al Haig told Francis
Pym of the contents of a further discussion he had had on the
telephone with Sr. Costa Mendez. Apparently, the Argentinians had
now dropped their five demands and moved a considerable way from
their previous position. Mr Haig thought there was a chance of a
settlement on the lines we had been discussing, if we would agree to
language about decolonization, subject to the wishes of the islanders,
with perhaps one or two small changes in addition to make the
proposals more palatable still. It was to turn out that this talk of
decolonization held its own particular dangers, though we agreed to
look at a draft. He also urged us not to be too rigid on the question of
sovereignty. He had decided to return to Washington and would
decide his next step there.
It was clear from all this that Mr Haig was very anxious to keep the
negotiations going. But had there been a genuine change of heart on
the part of the Argentinians, or was it just wishful thinking on his
part?
Wednesday 14 April was the day scheduled for a further Commons
debate on the Falklands. It was an opportunity for me to spell out our
objectives in the negotiations and to demonstrate to the outside world
the united support of the House of Commons. I told the House:

In any negotiations over the coming days we shall be guided by the
following principles. We shall continue to insist on Argentine withdrawal
from the Falkland Islands and dependencies. We shall remain ready to
exercise our right to resort to force in self-defence under Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter until the occupying forces leave the islands. Our
naval task force sails on towards its destination. We remain fully confident of
its ability to take whatever measures may be necessary. Meanwhile, its very
existence and its progress towards the Falkland Islands reinforce the efforts
we are making for a diplomatic solution.
That solution must safeguard the principle that the wishes of the islanders
shall remain paramount. There is no reason to believe that they would prefer
any alternative to the resumption of the administration which they enjoyed
before Argentina committed aggression. It may be that their recent
experiences will have caused their views on the future to change, but until
they have had the chance freely to express their views, the British
Government will not assume that the islanders’ wishes are different from
what they were before.

There were serious concerns underlying my reference to the
possibility of the islanders changing their views on the future
government of the Falklands: we worried that morale might collapse
and that large numbers might leave. We were able to find out a certain
amount about daily life under the occupation from messages which
reached London, but the picture was far from complete.
While the debate was still in progress, Al Haig was on the telephone.
The Argentinians were complaining that the United States was not
being even-handed between Argentina and Britain and in particular
that it was supplying military aid to Britain. He wanted to make a
statement which would allow him to return to Buenos Aires to
continue the negotiations, ending with these three sentences:
Since the outset of the crisis the United States has not acceded to requests
that would go beyond the scope of customary patterns of co-operation. That
would continue to be its stand while peace efforts were under way. Britain’s
use of US facilities on Ascension Island had been restricted accordingly.

While the debate continued, I discussed it with Francis Pym and,
half an hour later, rang Al Haig back in Washington.
I was very unhappy about what he wanted to say and I told him so.
Of course, a good deal was being done to help us. This was occurring
within those ‘customary patterns of co-operation’ which applied
between allies like the United States and Britain. But to link this with
the use of Ascension Island was wrong and misleading. Moreover, to
make such a statement would have a very adverse reaction on UK
opinion.
I went on to point out that Ascension Island was our island, indeed
the Queen’s island. The Americans used it as a base — but, as the
Secretary of State well knew, this was under an agreement which
made it clear that sovereignty remained with us. I am glad to say that
Mr Haig agreed to remove all mention of Ascension Island from his
statement.

The following day Al Haig flew from Washington to Buenos Aires for
further talks. Back in London, however, it was the military realities
which were most on my mind. The War Cabinet met that morning not
in No. 10 but in the Ministry of Defence. We had important decisions
to make. More troops were needed and had to be sent to join the task
force. We had to look at the new draft we had agreed the previous day
to consider. (Nothing came of it in the end.) We also had to prepare a
message to the United States stressing the need for them to help
enforce the agreement during that period and to ensure that when it
ended the Argentinians did not attempt another invasion. I am afraid
that we never got very far: the Americans were not keen to accept the
role of guarantor.
However, our main business at the MoD was a thorough briefing on
the military realities. It was important that we all knew precisely what
forces were ranged against us, their capability, the effects of the
Antarctic winter and, of course, the options available. Anyone who
had harboured the idea that the task force could blockade the
Falklands and mount raids in the case of the negotiations being
unsuccessful was soon disabused. Quite apart from the likely losses of
aircraft — the two aircraft carriers had only 20 Harriers between them
— the difficulties of maintaining men and equipment in those stormy
seas were huge. It was clear that we had a period of some two to three
weeks in May during which we might land without terrible casualties.
And then there were decisions to be made about how much more
equipment, aircraft and troops to send, how to deal with the resulting
prisoners of war, what to do about South Georgia and when. There
was to be no respite at all. And these decisions must be made quickly.
I looked from the Chiefs of Staff to my colleagues. It was a lot for them
to take in. With the exception of John Nott, who of course was already
briefed on the difficulties, they seemed somewhat taken aback. By this
stage the press had learnt that we were at the MoD and I asked that
everyone look confident as we left.
Our main task on Friday 16 April was to consider and approve the
rules of engagement which would apply for transit from Ascension
Island, for the 200-mile zone around South Georgia and for the
purposes of South Georgia’s repossession. The rules of engagement are
the means by which the politicians authorize the framework within
which the military can be left to make the operational decisions. They
have to satisfy the objectives for which a particular military operation
is undertaken. They must also give the man on the spot reasonable
freedom to react as is required and to make his decisions knowing that
they will be supported by the politicians. So the rules have to be clear
and to cover all possible eventualities. It was after very careful
questioning of the Chiefs of Staff and the Attorney-General and after
long discussion that they were approved. Many other rules of
engagement would follow as each new phase of the operation had to
be considered. This was the first time any of us had had to make such

decisions.
I had received the day before a message from President Reagan who
had been rung by Galtieri, who apparently said that he was anxious to
avoid a conflict. There was no difficulty in replying to that. I told the
President:
I note that General Galtieri has reaffirmed to you his desire to avoid conflict.
But it seems to me — and I must state this frankly to you as a friend and ally
— that he fails to draw the obvious conclusion. It was not Britain who broke
the peace but Argentina. The mandatory Resolution of the Security Council,
to which you and we have subscribed, requires Argentina to withdraw its
troops from the Falkland Islands. That is the essential first step which must
be taken to avoid conflict. When it has been taken, discussions about the
future of the islands can profitably take place. Any suggestion that conflict
can be avoided by a device that leaves the aggressor in occupation is surely
gravely misplaced. The implications for other potential areas of tension and
for small countries everywhere would be of extreme seriousness. The
fundamental principles for which the free world stands would be shattered.

On Friday 16 April our two vital aircraft carriers HMS Hermes and
HMS Invincible reached Ascension Island.
After a week of labyrinthine negotiations, I spent the weekend at
Chequers. I found time to have a private lunch with friends and an
artist who was going to paint a view of the house and its surroundings.
However, I had to return to No. 10 briefly on Saturday evening to
receive a telephone call from President Reagan — there is a direct line
from Chequers to the White House, but there were technical problems
that day. I was glad to have the chance to go over the issues with the
President. I was gladder still that he agreed that it would not be
reasonable to ask us to move further towards the Argentine position.
Al Haig had found the Argentinians even more impossible than on his
first visit. The White House had instructed him to tell the Junta that if
they persisted in their intransigence this would lead to a breakdown of
talks and the US Administration would make clear who was to blame.
After church on Sunday morning John Nott came to lunch and we
discussed the military and diplomatic situation.
Far away in the Atlantic HMS Hermes, Invincible, Glamorgan,
Broadsword, Yarmouth, Alacrity and the Royal Fleet Auxiliaries Olmeda
and Resource left Ascension Island for the south.
That day I also telephoned Tony Parsons at home in New York to
discuss what, if anything, we should do at the United Nations. We
were in the happy position of having almost perfect backing for our
position, in the form of UNSCR 502. But the problem was that as the
Haig initiative was manifestly stalling and as military conflict loomed
there was a risk that somebody else would take an initiative and that
we would be placed in a difficult and defensive position in the
Security Council. We could attempt to forestall that by tabling a
resolution ourselves. But then it would be amended in ways which
were simply not acceptable to us. Tony Parsons and I agreed that the
best we could do for the moment was to hold our ground and seek to

resist the pressure, which would undoubtedly mount.
WEEK FOUR
It was on Monday that I first read the details of the proposals
discussed by Al Haig and the Argentinians in Buenos Aires. In
conveying them to us, the Secretary of State said that his own
disappointment with this text prevented him from attempting to
influence us in any way. Indeed, the proposals were quite
unacceptable. The closer one looked the clearer it was that Argentina
was still trying to keep what it had taken by force. The Argentinians
wanted to give themselves the military advantage and have our forces
redeployed far from the islands. They were intent on subverting the
traditional local administration by insisting that two representatives of
the Argentine Government should serve on each of the Island Councils.
They wanted to flood the islands with their own people to change the
nature of the population. Finally, they were not prepared to allow the
islanders to choose if they wished to return to the British
Administration they had enjoyed before the invasion. This latter point
was shrouded in obscure language but the intention was very clear.
The wording of their proposal was:
December 31st 1982 will conclude the interim period during which the
signatories shall conclude negotiations on modalities for the removal of the
islands from the list of non-self-governing territories under Chapter XI of the
United Nations Charter and on mutually agreed conditions for their
definitive status, including due regard for the rights of the inhabitants and
for the principle of territorial integrity applicable to this dispute …

The innocuous sounding reference to removing the islands from the
list under Chapter XI ruled out a return to the status quo ante the
invasion and so effectively denied the islanders the right to choose
freely the form of government under which they were to live. A great
many words to shroud the simple fact that the use of force would have
succeeded, dictatorship would have prevailed and the wishes of the
islanders would have been overridden. These proposals were so poor
that we told Al Haig that we saw no need for him to come to London
from Buenos Aires and promised to let him have detailed comments on
the text when he returned to Washington.
On the same day I received a telegram from Buenos Aires which
confirmed that there was no apparent let-up in the Junta’s
determination to secure sovereignty over the islands. Every five
minutes or so Argentine Radio would play the ‘Malvinas song’ which
ran, ‘I am your fatherland and may need you to die for me.’ Soon that
sentiment would be put to the test: it was on this day that the War
Cabinet authorized the operation to repossess South Georgia —
although the recovery was somewhat delayed because our ships
arrived in a Force 11 gale which lasted for several days.

Al Haig asked that Francis Pym should go to Washington to discuss
our views of the Argentine text and I agreed to this. Francis sent ahead
our detailed comments and essential amendments to the Buenos Aires
text. We agreed that he was to be guided by these counterproposals
during his visit. He was also to seek an American guarantee for the
security of the islands. Unfortunately during questions on a Commons
statement the following day, Francis gave the impression that force
would not be used as long as negotiations were continuing. This was
an impossible position for us to take up, enabling the Argentinians to
string us along indefinitely, and he had to return to the House later to
make a short statement retracting the remark.
Also on Wednesday we notified Al Haig via Nico Henderson that a
firm decision had been taken to recover South Georgia in the near
future. Mr Haig expressed himself surprised and concerned. He asked
whether our decision was final: I confirmed that it was. We were
informing, not consulting him. Later he told our ambassador that he
thought he would have to give the Argentine Junta advance notice of
our intended operation. We were appalled. Nico Henderson persuaded
him to think better of it.
Francis Pym spent Thursday in Washington discussing our proposals
with Al Haig. He did not get very far in pressing the idea of an
American guarantee. The Americans seemed unprepared to envisage
anything going beyond the interim period. Nor, as I was shortly to
learn, was he any more successful in putting across the rest of our
ideas. My own thoughts, however, were elsewhere. I was desperately
worried about what was happening in South Georgia.
That Thursday evening John Nott and the Chief of the Defence Staff
came to Downing Street to give me urgent news. Our Special Forces
had landed on the Fortuna glacier in South Georgia to carry out a
reconnaissance. The first attempt to get them in had had to be
abandoned because of high wind and heavy snow. During a temporary
and slight improvement in conditions our men were successfully
landed. But the weather then rapidly worsened with a south-west wind
gusting over 70 knots. Their exposed position on the glacier became
intolerable and they sent a message to HMS Antrim asking for
helicopters to take them off. The first helicopter came in and, blinded
by the snow, crashed. A second suffered the same fate. The MoD did
not know whether lives had been lost. It was a terrible and disturbing
start to the campaign.
My heart was heavy as I changed for a charity dinner at the Mansion
House at which I was to be the main speaker. How was I to conceal
my feelings? I allowed myself to wonder whether the task we had set
ourselves was truly impossible. But just as I reached the foot of the
stairs at No. 10 on my way out, Clive Whitmore, my principal private
secretary, rushed out of his office with more news. A third helicopter
had landed on the glacier and picked up all the SAS men and the other
two helicopter crews. How that pilot managed it I do not know.

Months later I met him — completely modest, quietly professional: his
comment was that he had never seen so many people in his helicopter.
As I carried on out of No. 10 and left for the dinner I walked on air.
All our people had survived.
On Friday 23 April we gave a general warning to Argentina that any
approach on the part of their warships, submarines or aircraft which
could amount to a threat to British forces in the South Atlantic would
be regarded as hostile and dealt with accordingly. Later that day I
went to Northwood from where military operations and all the
logistics were being directed. It was fascinating to see how the
decisions were put into effect. I had lunch at the home of Admiral
Fieldhouse and his wife, Midge, before returning to No. 10.
Francis Pym was now on his way back from the United States with
new draft proposals.
Saturday 24 April was to be one of the most crucial days in the
Falklands story and a critical one for me personally. Early that
morning Francis came to my study in No. 10 to tell me the results of
his efforts. I can only describe the document which he brought back as
conditional surrender. Al Haig was a powerful persuader and anyone
on the other side of the table had to stand up to him, not give ground.
Mr Haig had clearly played upon the imminence of hostilities and the
risk that Britain would lose international support if fighting broke out.
I told Francis that the terms were totally unacceptable. They would
rob the Falklanders of their freedom and Britain of her honour and
respect. Francis disagreed. He thought that we should accept what was
in the document. We were at loggerheads.
A meeting of the War Cabinet had been arranged for that evening
and I spent the rest of that day comparing in detail all the different
proposals which had been made up to that point in the diplomacy. The
closer I looked the clearer it was that our position was being
abandoned and the Falklanders betrayed. I asked for the AttorneyGeneral to come to No. 10 and go through them with me. But the
message went astray and instead he went to the Foreign Office. Less
than an hour before the War Cabinet, he at last received the message
and came to see me, only to confirm all my worst fears.
It is important to understand that what might appear at first glance
to the untutored eye as minor variations in language between
diplomatic texts can be of vital significance, as they were in this case.
There were four main texts to compare. There were the proposals
which Al Haig discussed with us and took to Argentina on 12 April.
Our own attitude towards these had been left deliberately vague:
though he had discussed them in detail with us, we had not committed
ourselves to accept them. Then there were the totally impossible
proposals brought back by Mr Haig after his visit to Buenos Aires on
19 April. On 22 April we amended those proposals in ways acceptable
to us and it was on this basis that Francis Pym had been instructed to
negotiate. Finally, there was the latest draft brought back by Francis

from the United States, which now confronted me. The differences
between the texts of 22 and 24 April went to the heart of why we were
prepared to fight a war for the Falklands.
First, there was the question of how far and fast would our forces
withdraw. Under the text Francis Pym had brought back our task force
would have had to stand off even further than in the Buenos Aires
proposals. Worse still, all of our forces, including the submarines,
would have to leave the defined zones within seven days, depriving us
of any effective military leverage over the withdrawal process. What if
the Argentinians went back on the deal? Also the task force would
have to disperse altogether after 15 days. Nor was there any way of
ensuring that Argentine troops kept to the provision that they be ‘at
less than 7 days’ readiness to invade again’ (whatever that meant).
Second, sanctions against Argentina were to be abandoned the
moment the agreement was signed, rather than as in our
counterproposals on completion of withdrawal. Thus we lost the only
other means we had to ensure that Argentine withdrawal actually took
place.
Third, as regards the Special Interim Authority the text reverted to
the Buenos Aires proposal for two representatives of the Argentine
Government on the Islands’ Councils, as well as at least one
representative of the local Argentine population. Moreover, there was
a return to the wording relating to Argentine residence and property
which would effectively have allowed them to swamp the existing
population with Argentinians.
Equally important was the wording relating to the long-term
negotiations after Argentine withdrawal. Like the Buenos Aires
document, Francis Pym’s ruled out the possibility of a return to the
situation enjoyed by the islanders before the invasion. We would have
gone against our commitment to the principle that the islanders’
wishes were paramount and would have abandoned all possibility of
their staying with us. Did Francis realize how much he had signed
away?
Despite my clear views expressed that morning, Francis put in a
paper to the War Cabinet recommending acceptance of these terms.
Shortly before 6 o’clock that evening ministers and civil servants
began assembling outside the Cabinet Room. Francis was there, busy
lobbying for their support. I asked Willie Whitelaw to come upstairs to
my study. I told him that I could not accept these terms and gave him
my reasons. As always on crucial occasions he backed my judgement.
The meeting began and Francis Pym introduced his paper,
recommending that we concur in the plan. But five hours of
preparation on my part had not been wasted. I went through the text
clause by clause. What did each point actually mean? How come that
we had now accepted what had previously been rejected? Why had we
not insisted as a minimum on self-determination? Why had we

accepted almost unlimited Argentine immigration and acquisition of
property on an equal basis with the existing Falkland Islanders? The
rest of the committee were with me.
It was John Nott who found the procedural way forward. He
proposed that we should make no comment on the draft but ask Mr
Haig to put it to the Argentinians first. If they accepted it we should
undoubtedly be in difficulties: but we could then put the matter to
Parliament in the light of their acceptance. If the Argentinians rejected
it — and we thought that they would, because it is almost impossible
for any military Junta to withdraw — we could then urge the
Americans to come down firmly on our side, as Al Haig had indicated
they would as long as we did not break off the negotiations. This is
what was decided. I sent a message to Mr Haig:
This whole business started with an Argentine aggression. Since then our
purpose together has been to ensure the early withdrawal by the
Argentinians in accordance with the Security Council Resolution. We think
therefore that the next step should be for you to put your latest ideas to
them. I hope that you will seek the Argentine Government’s view of them
tomorrow and establish urgently whether they can accept them. Knowledge
of their attitude will be important to the British Cabinet’s consideration of
your ideas.

And so a great crisis passed. I could not have stayed as Prime
Minister had the War Cabinet accepted Francis Pym’s proposals. I
would have resigned.
That difficult and decisive argument was followed the next day by
the recapture of South Georgia. At Grytviken an Argentine submarine
was spotted on the surface and was successfully attacked by our
helicopters and immobilized. A certain Captain Astiz had been in
charge of the Argentine garrison there. His capture was to present us
with problems. He was wanted for murder by both France and
Sweden. He was flown to Ascension and then brought to Britain, but
refused to answer questions and, due to the provisions of the Geneva
Convention on Prisoners of War eventually, reluctantly, we had to
return him to Argentina.
Later that afternoon I learnt of our success in South Georgia. An
audience was arranged with the Queen that evening at Windsor. I was
glad to be able personally to give her the news that one of her islands
had been recovered. I returned to Downing Street to await
confirmation of the earlier signal and the release of the news. I wanted
John Nott to have the opportunity of making the announcement and
so I had him come to No. 10. Together, he, the MoD press officer, and
I drafted the press release and then went out to announce the good
news.
A remark of mine was misinterpreted, sometimes wilfully. After
John Nott had made his statement journalists tried to ask questions.
‘What happens next Mr Nott? Are we going to declare war on
Argentina Mrs Thatcher?’ It seemed as if they preferred to press us on

these issues rather than to report news that would raise the nation’s
spirits and give the Falklanders new heart. I was irritated and
intervened to stop them: Just rejoice at that news and congratulate our
forces and the marines … Rejoice’. I meant that they should rejoice in
the bloodless recapture of South Georgia, not in the war itself. To me
war is not a matter for rejoicing. But some pretended otherwise.
A worry for us at this point was that the press and probably some of
the public began to assume that it would only be a matter of days
before we retook the Falklands and that this would be as quick as the
recapture of South Georgia. We knew that this was far from true.
Indeed, it was only on that day that the last ships of the amphibious
group necessary for the landing left Britain. Led by the assault ship
HMS Intrepid, there were the ferries Norland and Europic carrying the
2nd Battalion of the Parachute Regiment, and — loaded with vital
stores — the container ship Atlantic Conveyor.
WEEK FIVE
On Monday 26 April, the War Cabinet agreed the announcement of a
Total Exclusion Zone (TEZ) of a 200-nautical-mile radius and the rules
of engagement which were to apply to it. The military pressure on
Argentina was steadily mounting. The TEZ went beyond the earlier
MEZ by excluding aircraft as well as sea-going craft: the task force
would shortly be close enough to the Falklands to be able to enforce it
and to be at risk from air attack itself. One priority was to close down
the airfield at Port Stanley.
At home the apparent imminence of full-scale military conflict
began to shake the determination of those whose commitment to
retaking the Falklands had always been weaker than it appeared. Some
MPs seemed to want negotiations to continue indefinitely. I had to put
the realities to the nation. At Prime Minister’s Questions I said:
I must point out that time is getting extremely short as the task force
approaches the islands. Three weeks have elapsed since the Resolution SCR
502. One cannot have a wide range of choice and a wide range of military
options with the task force in the wild and stormy weathers of that area.

I made the same point in a live interview that evening on Panorama:
I have to keep in mind the interests of our boys who are on those warships
and our marines. I have to watch the safety of their lives, to see that they can
succeed in doing whatever it is we decide they have to do at the best
possible time and with minimum risk to them.

I also took the opportunity to say directly just what we were
fighting for:
I’m standing up for the right of self-determination. I’m standing up for our
territory. I’m standing up for our people. I’m standing up for international
law. I’m standing up for all those territories — those small territories and
peoples the world over — who, if someone doesn’t stand up and say to an

invader ‘enough, stop’ … would be at risk.

Unfortunately, the cracks now appearing in the Labour Party were
likely to be widened by what was happening at the United Nations.
The Secretary-General of the UN started to become more involved as
the Haig mediation manifestly stalled. A low-key appeal from Sr. Perez
de Cuellar to both sides — which appeared to imply that we, like
Argentina, had failed to comply with UNSCR 502 — was seized upon
by Denis Healey and Michael Foot. I had a serious clash with Mr Foot
during Prime Minister’s Questions on Tuesday 27 April on the question
of our returning to the United Nations. In fact, the Secretary-General
very quickly took the point, but the damage was done. We ourselves
had been exploring whether an offer from President López-Portillo of
Mexico to provide a venue for negotiations might be productive. But
Al Haig did not wish us to pursue this and I doubt whether the
Mexicans would in fact have proposed the simpler and more
satisfactory formula which we wanted.
Al Haig had had his own share of diplomatic problems. His speech
to a meeting of the Organization of American States justifying the
United States line on the Falklands and Argentina had been greeted
with stony silence. The Argentine Foreign minister, furious at the
retaking of South Georgia, had publicly refused to see him, though
they had been in contact privately.
Al Haig could not under these circumstances go back to Buenos
Aires, which from our point of view was probably all to the good. He
had again modified the proposals discussed with Francis Pym in
Washington and now transmitted these to the Argentine Government.
Mr Haig told the Junta that no amendments were permissible and
imposed a strict time limit for their reply, though he was subsequently
unwilling to stick to this. For its part, the Junta was now determined
to play for time. Al Haig telephoned Francis Pym in the afternoon of
Wednesday 28 April to say that there was still no word from Buenos
Aires. Both Francis and Nico Henderson continued to press him to say
publicly that the Argentinians were to blame for the failure of his
mediation and that the United States was openly supporting us.
At Cabinet on Thursday 29 April we discussed the continuing
uncertainty. The deadline given to the Argentinians for their answer
had passed, but now Mr Haig was talking of the possibility of the
Argentinians amending his proposals. Where would all this end?
After Cabinet I sent a message to President Reagan saying that in
our view the Argentinians must now be regarded as having rejected
the American proposals. In fact, later that day the Argentinians did
formally reject the American text. President Reagan now replied to my
message in these terms:
I am sure you agree that it is essential now to make clear to the world that
every effort was made to achieve a fair and peaceful solution, and that the
Argentine Government was offered a choice between such a solution and
further hostilities. We will therefore make public a general account of the

efforts we have made. While we will describe the US proposal in broad
terms, we will not release it because of the difficulty that might cause you. I
recognize that while you see fundamental difficulties in the proposal, you
have not rejected it. We will leave no doubt that Her Majesty’s Government
worked with us in good faith and was left with no choice but to proceed with
military action based on the right of self-defence.

This was very satisfactory. We wanted a clear statement that the
Argentinians were to blame for the failure of negotiations. But we did
not want to muddy the waters by revealing every detail of proposals
which were in truth fundamentally unacceptable to us, nor did we
want to imply that we had accepted the Haig proposals.
There was, though, one drawback. This was that once the Haig
mediation had formally ended the pressure would sharply increase for
us to go back to the UN where we would be faced by any number of
difficulties. Indeed Tony Parsons advised us that once we were back in
the Security Council there would be no way of avoiding an
unacceptable call on us to halt military preparations and accept the
good offices of the Secretary-General. This would mean that we would
have to use our veto, which we wanted to avoid. In fact, although this
assessment was correct it was not until the following month that all
this came to a head. We were fortunate that it did not occur earlier.
Friday 30 April effectively marked the end of the beginning of our
diplomatic and military campaign to regain the Falklands. The United
States now came down clearly on our side. President Reagan told
television correspondents that the Argentinians had resorted to armed
aggression and that such aggression must not be allowed to succeed.
Most important, the President also directed that the United States
would respond positively to requests for military materiel.
Unfortunately, they were not prepared to agree to place an embargo
on imports from Argentina. However, the President’s announcements
constituted a substantial moral boost to our position.
It was on this day that the TEZ came into force. And although
diplomatic and military affairs remained inextricably intertwined, it is
fair to say that from now on it was the military rather than the
diplomatic which increasingly commanded our attention. At that
morning’s War Cabinet it was the Argentine aircraft carrier, the 25 de
Mayo, which concerned us. She could cover 500 miles a day and her
aircraft a further 500. Her escorts carried Exocet missiles, supplied by
France in the 1970s. We were well aware that the Exocet threat should
be taken seriously. It increased the danger which the Argentine carrier
group posed to our ships and their supply lines. We therefore
authorized an attack on the carrier, wherever she was, provided it was
south of latitude 35 degrees and east of longitude 48, and outside the
12-mile limit of Argentine territorial waters. Such an attack would be
based upon the right of self-defence and be within Article 51 of the UN
Charter; in accordance with the notification which had been given on
23 April no further warning was required.*

That evening I had to speak at a large rally in Stephen Hastings’s
constituency at Milton Hall in Bedfordshire. Stephen and his
predecessor Alan Lennox-Boyd spoke magnificently. I was given a
wonderful reception. No one present had any doubt of the justice of
our cause, nor that we would eventually win through. I felt proud and
exhilarated: but I felt too an almost crushing burden of responsibility. I
knew that the task force would enter the waters around the Falkland
Islands the following day.
Later, when the war was won, Enoch Powell returned to the subject in a
Parliamentary Question: ‘Is the Rt. Hon. Lady aware that the report has now been
received from the public analyst on a certain substance recently subjected to analysis
and that I have obtained a copy of the report? It shows that the substance under test
consisted of ferrous matter of the highest quality, and that it is of exceptional tensile
strength, is highly resistant to wear and tear and to stress, and may be used to
advantage for all national purposes.’ Ian Gow had the two quotes printed and framed
for me as a Christmas present in 1982; they hang still on my office wall.
*

The MEZ was a circle with a 200-nautical-mile radius drawn around a point
approximately at the centre of the Falkland Islands. From the time of its coming into
effect any Argentine warships and naval auxiliaries found in the zone would be treated
as hostile and would be liable to be attacked by British forces.
*

*

See p. 205.

CHAPTER VIII

The Falklands: Victory
The battle for the Falklands in May and June 1982

From the beginning of May through to the recapture of the Falklands
in mid-June military considerations loomed ever larger in my mind.
But this did not mean that the pressure for negotiations eased — far
from it. I was under an almost intolerable pressure to negotiate for the
sake of negotiation and because so many politicians were desperately
anxious to avoid the use of force — as if the Argentinians had not
already used force by invading in the first place. At such a time almost
everything and everyone seems to combine to deflect you from what
you know has to be done.
Yet I could never afford to ignore the diplomatic effort because on
its successful conduct rested our hard-won position of UN Security
Council support for Resolution 502 and, still more important, the
degree of support we might receive from our allies, above all the
United States. And all this time there was constant, nagging fear of the
unknown. Would we have sufficient air cover? Where were the
Argentine submarines? Would we be able to reach the military and
diplomatic position required for a successful landing within that
narrow time-frame set by the onset of intolerable winter weather in
the South Atlantic?
Over breakfast at Milton Hall I received a telephone call to say that
our Vulcans had bombed the runway of Port Stanley airport. Our naval
task force was also bombarding Argentine positions elsewhere on the
Falklands. I was told that there had so far been no British casualties
but it would still be many hours before the Vulcans — after their
marathon flight involving five mid-air refuellings — would be back at
Ascension Island. In fact they all returned safely. The refuelling
seemed a stupendous feat at the time, although such is the way of
things that later performances of this kind came almost to be taken for
granted.
That day the Argentine Air Force mounted a major attack on our
ships. The Argentinians were in a position to send photographs to the
outside world, which we were not. They claimed that many of our
aeroplanes had been shot down but in that famous broadcast Brian
Hanrahan, the excellent BBC correspondent, put the record straight
when he reported: ‘I counted them all out and I counted them all
back.’ It was a great relief. But we had no illusions about the
significance of the heavy attack and the vital question it raised about
the sufficiency of our air cover.

The next day, Sunday, which I spent at Chequers, was one of great
— though often misunderstood — significance for the outcome of the
Falklands War. As often on Sundays during the crisis, the members of
the War Cabinet, Chiefs of Staff and officials came to Chequers for
lunch and discussions. On this occasion there was a special matter on
which I needed an urgent decision.
I called together Willie Whitelaw, John Nott, Cecil Parkinson,
Michael Havers, Terry Lewin, Admiral Fieldhouse and Sir Antony
Acland, the Permanent Secretary at the Foreign Office. (Francis Pym
was in America.) Admiral Fieldhouse told us that one of our
submarines, HMS Conqueror, had been shadowing the Argentine
cruiser, General Belgrano. The Belgrano was escorted by two destroyers.
The cruiser itself had substantial fire power provided by 6 guns with a
range of 13 miles and anti-aircraft missiles. We were advised that she
might have been fitted with Exocet anti-ship missiles, and her two
destroyer escorts were known to be carrying them. The whole group
was sailing on the edge of the Exclusion Zone. We had received
intelligence about the aggressive intentions of the Argentine fleet.
There had been extensive air attacks on our ships the previous day and
Admiral Woodward, in command of the task force, had every reason to
believe that a full-scale attack was developing. The Argentine aircraft
carrier, the 25 de Mayo, had been sighted some time earlier and we
had agreed to change the rules of engagement to deal with the threat
she posed. However, our submarine had lost contact with the carrier,
which had slipped past it to the north. There was a strong possibility
that Conqueror might also lose contact with the Belgrano group.
Admiral Woodward had to come to a judgement about what to do
with the Belgrano in the light of these circumstances. From all the
information available, he concluded that the carrier and the Belgrano
group were engaged in a classic pincer movement against the task
force. It was clear to me what must be done to protect our forces, in
the light of Admiral Woodward’s concern and Admiral Fieldhouse’s
advice. We therefore decided that British forces should be able to
attack any Argentine naval vessel on the same basis as agreed
previously for the carrier.
Later we approved reinforcements for the Falklands which would be
taken there in the QE2. It surprised me a little that the need for
reinforcements had not been clear sooner. I asked whether it was
really necessary or advisable to use this great ship and to put so many
people in it, but as soon as I was told that it was necessary to get them
there in time I gave my agreement. I was always concerned that we
would not have sufficient men and equipment when the time came for
the final battle and I was repeatedly struck by the fact that even such
highly qualified professionals as advised us often underestimated the
requirements. We broke up still desperately worried that the aircraft
carrier which could have done such damage to our vulnerable task
force had not been found.

The necessary order conveying the change of rules of engagement
was sent from Northwood to HMS Conqueror at 1.30 p.m. In fact, it
was not until after 5 p.m. that Conqueror reported that she had
received the order. The Belgrano was torpedoed and sunk just before 8
o’clock that evening. Our submarine headed away as quickly as
possible. Wrongly believing that they would be the next targets, the
Belgrano’s escorts seem to have engaged in anti-submarine activities
rather than rescuing its crew, some 321 of whom were lost — though
initially the death toll was reported to be much higher. The ship’s poor
state of battle readiness greatly increased the casualties. Back in
London we knew that the Belgrano had been hit, but it was some hours
before we knew that she had sunk.

A large amount of malicious and misleading nonsense was circulated
at the time and long afterwards about the reasons why we sank the
Belgrano. These allegations have been demonstrated to be without
foundation. The decision to sink the Belgrano was taken for strictly
military not political reasons: the claim that we were trying to
undermine a promising peace initiative from Peru will not bear
scrutiny. Those of us who took the decision at Chequers did not at that
time know anything about the Peruvian proposals, which in any case
closely resembled the Haig plan rejected by the Argentinians only days
before. There was a clear military threat which we could not
responsibly ignore. Moreover, subsequent events more than justified
what was done. As a result of the devastating loss of the Belgrano, the
Argentine Navy — above all the carrier — went back to port and
stayed there. Thereafter it posed no serious threat to the success of the
task force, though of course we were not to know that this would be so
at the time. The sinking of the Belgrano turned out to be one of the
most decisive military actions of the war.
However, the shocking loss of life caused us many problems because
it provided a reason — or in some cases perhaps an excuse — for
breaks in the ranks among the less committed of our allies: it also
increased pressure on us at the UN. The Irish Government called for an
immediate meeting of the Security Council, though after intense
pressure from Tony Parsons and some from the UN Secretary-General,
they were eventually persuaded to suspend their request — not,
however, before the Irish Defence minister had described us as ‘the
aggressor’. There was some wavering from the French and rather more
from the West Germans, who pressed for a cease-fire and UN
negotiations. Moreover, by the time of the sinking of the Belgrano, the
diplomatic scene was already becoming more difficult and
complicated.
I have already mentioned the peace plan which the President of
Peru had put to Al Haig and which he in turn had put to Francis Pym
in Washington on 1 and 2 May, though we had no sight of it until
later. With the sinking of the Belgrano, Mr Haig was once again
bringing pressure to bear, urging on us diplomatic magnanimity and,

expressing his belief that whatever the course of the military campaign
there must be a negotiated outcome to avoid open-ended hostility and
instability. To add to the confusion, the UN Secretary-General was
now seeking to launch a peace initiative of his own, much to the
irritation of Mr Haig.
WEEK SIX
Both military and diplomatic pressures now mounted. On Tuesday 4
May the destroyer HMS Sheffield was hit by an Argentine Exocet
missile with devastating effects. The loss of the Sheffield was the result
of a number of mishaps and mistakes, but it was a terrible
demonstration of the risks our forces faced. The Sheffield was a
relatively old ship, with outdated radar: it was transmitting via
satellite to London moments before the missile struck, interfering with
its capacity to detect the attack sufficiently in advance to throw up
chaff as a decoy. Also the fire doors were open and, as we learnt from
the raging fire that followed the missile impact, there was too much
aluminium in the structure. Although the ship did not sink at first, it
proved impossible due to the rough seas to bring it back home, as I
had wished, and eventually she went down. At first I was told that
there were 20 casualties: then 40.
It was very difficult to know how to announce this sort of news. We
would have liked to inform all next of kin first, and indeed sought to
do so. But meanwhile the Argentinians would be putting out
statements — some true, some false but all with a deliberate purpose
— before we knew the real facts. As a result, wives and families spent
some agonizing days and nights. That day we also lost one of our
Harriers.
By this stage Francis Pym had returned from the United States. We
did not like the US/Peruvian proposals he brought with him and
sought to have important changes made, above all to ensure that the
wishes of the islanders were respected. Al Haig, however, would not
accept our changes or pass them to the Peruvians because he believed
that the Argentinians would reject them out of hand. I received a
message from President Reagan urging us to make further
compromise.
On the morning of Wednesday 5 May I called first the War Cabinet
and then the full Cabinet to consider the US/Peruvian proposals.
Francis Pym believed that in view of the battle in the South Atlantic it
would be damaging to reject what were in effect Al Haig’s proposals.
Moreover, as I have noted, the countries of the European Community
which had been very strong at first were beginning to weaken in their
support. The sanctions which they had agreed were only for a month
and there would be difficulty in getting everyone to approve their
renewal.

I was deeply unhappy about the US/Peruvian proposals. Cabinet did
not like them much either. But we had to make some response. I
wanted to ensure that any interim administration would consult the
islanders and that their wishes should be respected in the long-term
settlement. I also wanted South Georgia and the other Falklands
dependencies to be outside the scope of the proposals. Cabinet was
firm about these objectives. We agreed to seek changes to meet them
and in this we were successful.
I did not like this constant pressure to weaken our stance. I drafted a
personal letter to President Reagan that revealed perhaps too much of
my frustration, though I toned it down before it was sent. But I took
comfort from the fact that I had never believed that the Argentine
Junta would be prepared to withdraw on these or any other terms —
and indeed the Argentinians turned down the US/Peruvian proposals.
Attention now increasingly shifted to the proposals of the UN
Secretary-General. The Argentinians sent their Foreign minister to
New York. They hoped to capitalize on the sympathy they had gained
as a result of the sinking of the Belgrano and their spirits had been
lifted by the destruction of the Sheffield. There was no lack of
candidates to suggest new ‘initiatives’ — not the least surprising or
impractical of which was the suggestion of President López-Portillo
that I should have a private meeting with General Galtieri in Mexico.
But I was not going to sell out the islanders and I knew that the
Argentine Junta could not withdraw and survive. Obviously there was
little prospect of a diplomatic ‘breakthrough’, yet still the apparently
endless negotiations continued.
Tony Parsons defended Britain’s position at the UN with great force
and brilliance. The Argentinians were clearly determined to get the
maximum propaganda advantage in the new discussions sponsored by
the UN Secretary-General. He warned Sr. Perez de Cuellar of our past
experiences of trying to deal with the Junta. The Secretary-General
could expect that agreements apparently satisfactory to Argentine
representatives would then be disowned by the Junta and that the
Argentinians were intent on establishing sovereignty as a precondition
of any settlement.
I was not prepared to hold up military progress for negotiations. We
were all aware that we were coming to a critical period. If we were to
land and repossess the islands it would have to be done some time
between 16 and 30 May. We could not leave it later because of the
weather. That meant that negotiations at the UN must be completed
within ten days or so. If they were successful and our principles and
minimum requirements were met, well and good. If not, or they were
still dragging on, then — if the Chiefs of Staff so advised — we would
have to go ahead.
I had mixed feelings about the negotiations. I shared the desire to
avoid a further bloody conflict. I spoke about this to Tony Parsons on
the telephone on Saturday 8 May. I asked Tony to tell the Secretary-

General that we would be pleased to welcome him in London. I went
on:
In the end you know we might have to go in. I say in the end — time is
short. But I just feel deeply … first that our people there were living in selfdetermination and freedom before this started and one can’t hand them over
to anything less. But secondly that it is going to be the most awful waste of
young life if we really have to go and take those islands … I will do
everything before the final decision has to be taken to see if we can uphold
the rule of international law and the liberty and justice, in which I believe
passionately for our people, to see if we can stop a final battle.

However, as the negotiations with the Argentinians in Washington
continued it became ever more evident that they were not prepared to
make the concessions we required. They were determined to include
South Georgia and the dependencies. They wanted to deny the
islanders any proper means of expressing their views during the
interim period. They were pressing for the complete withdrawal of the
British task force to its bases in the UK — which, now that the battle
for the Falklands had begun, was of course even more unacceptable
than it had been before. They also wanted to be able to move in their
own people and acquire property so as to change the whole terms of
the argument. It was clear that the negotiations would fail. We must
ensure that when they did so the Argentinians did not manage to shift
the blame on to us. Ideally, we should bring them to a definite
conclusion before the landings took place. An ultimatum was
obviously necessary.
On Sunday afternoon at Chequers (9 May) our regular meeting
reviewed the diplomatic and military scene. We discussed the state of
the negotiations and where they might lead. There was also a
politically sensitive military matter. Argentine civilian aircraft were
flying over our supply lines and doubtless communicating their
findings direct to their submarines. We had every right to act to stop
this. But could we be sure that if we shot at a civilian aircraft it would
turn out to be an Argentine one? The radar characteristics and the
typical flight path of an aircraft on surveillance would help to identify
those on such reconnaissance missions. But there was an obvious risk
that something could go wrong. We also had to consider the possibility
of a commando raid against Ascension Island and our forces there —
unlikely perhaps, but potentially devastating.
WEEK SEVEN
We now had to stand firm against the pressure for making
unacceptable compromises while avoiding the appearance of
intransigence. Specific instructions went to Tony Parsons about our
position on withdrawal distances, interim administration, the issue of
immigration and the acquisition of property during the interim period
and to ensure that the Argentinians did not get away with prejudging

the issue on sovereignty: that was for the islanders to decide. There
were detailed discussions on the constitutional position of a United
Nations administration of the islands. Our view was that the UN
representative could only administer the law, not change it. If he
wished to do so he would have to act through the islands’ Legislative
Council. We also continued to press for a United States military
guarantee of the security of the islands — but with very limited
success. The UN Secretary-General was somewhat taken aback by the
firmness of our stance. But Tony Parsons impressed on him the basic
facts of the dispute. It was not we who had committed the aggression,
though we had made a number of major concessions. Any
arrangement which appeared to reward Argentine aggression would
simply not be accepted in Britain.
The Argentinians could not be trusted. For example, on the issue of
not prejudging sovereignty, their representative said one thing to the
Secretary-General while their Foreign minister said quite the opposite
in his public statements. Who was to be believed? The information we
were receiving from the Americans about the attitude of the Argentine
Junta confirmed our worst predictions. They were apparently not able
to give way on sovereignty, even if they had wished, because of the
political situation in which they now found themselves. This, however,
was their problem not ours. My own views at this time were hardening
because I was convinced that if anything we had already gone too far
in making concessions. My feelings were echoed in the House of
Commons. In the debate on Thursday 13 May Conservative backbenchers showed evidence of restlessness about our negotiations.
Francis Pym continued to pursue a weaker line than I did and it was
not liked.
Al Haig was now in Europe and his absence apparently gave those in
the Administration who were favourable to the Argentinians an
opportunity to persuade President Reagan that it was we who were
being inflexible. President Reagan telephoned me at 6.40 that evening.
He had gained the impression that the Argentinians and ourselves
were now quite close in our negotiating positions. I had to tell him
that unfortunately this was not the case. Major obstacles remained. As
regards the interim arrangements, Argentina wanted greater Argentine
participation than we could accept and there were substantial
difficulties about ownership of property and freedom of movement.
Secondly, there was the difficulty of South Georgia where our title was
completely different and we were in possession. There was the added
problem that we just did not know with whom we were really
negotiating. The Argentinians were trying to arrange an interim
administration which would lead inevitably to Argentine sovereignty.
Finally, there was no guarantee that at a later stage they might not
invade the islands again.
President Reagan had been talking to the President of Brazil who
had been visiting Washington. There was some concern (entirely

misplaced) that we were preparing an attack on the Argentine
mainland: whether or not such attacks would have made any military
sense, we saw from the beginning that they would cause too much
political damage to our position to be anything but counterproductive. President Reagan wanted us to hold off military action. I
said that Argentina had attacked our ships only yesterday. We could
not delay military options simply because of negotiations. The truth
was that it was only our military measures which had produced a
diplomatic response, highly unsatisfactory as this was.
President Reagan was also concerned that the struggle was being
portrayed as one between David and Goliath — in which the United
Kingdom was cast as Goliath. I pointed out that this could hardly be
true at a distance of 8000 miles. I reminded the President that he
would not wish his people to live under the sort of regime offered by
the military Junta and also of the length of time that many of the
islanders had lived there and the strategic significance of the Falkland
Islands if, for example, the Panama Canal were ever closed. I finished
by seeking to persuade him — I believe successfully — that he had
been misinformed about the Argentinians’ alleged concessions. It was
a difficult conversation but on balance probably a useful one. The fact
that even our closest ally — and someone who had already proved
himself one of my closest political friends — could look at things in
this way demonstrated the difficulties we faced.
On the morning of Friday 14 May there were two separate meetings
of the War Cabinet. One consisted of a detailed assessment of the
military position and options. The other was taken up with the
diplomatic situation. We decided to prepare our own terms to put to
the Argentinians as an ultimatum and Tony Parsons and Nico
Henderson were summoned back from the United States to Chequers
to discuss these for the weekend.
Two events that day and the next gave a great boost to my morale.
First, there was the welcome I received from the Scottish Conservative
Party Conference in Perth — an occasion which, as I have said before,
I always enjoyed. In my speech I set out precisely what we were
fighting for and why. I also said:
The Government wants a peaceful settlement. But we totally reject a peaceful
sell-out.

The Leader of the Liberal Party, David Steel, accused me of
‘jingoism’. How remote politicians can seem at these times of crisis:
neither the audience nor the nation would fall into the same trap of
characterizing determination to secure justice and the country’s
honour in terms like that.
Secondly, I also learned of the successful raid under cover of
darkness by our SAS and Special Boat Service men on Pebble Island off
the north of West Falkland, destroying all eleven Argentinian aircraft
at the air strip. It was a daring venture and a significant, though

unheeded, warning to the Argentinians of the professionalism of our
forces.
That Sunday at Chequers was mainly spent in drafting our own final
proposals, to be put to the Argentinians by the UN Secretary-General.
The vital consideration was that we bring the negotiating process to an
end — ideally, before the landings — but in such a way as to avoid
appearing intransigent. It became clear that we would have to make a
very reasonable offer. I accepted this because I was convinced that the
Argentinians would reject it, and strictly on a take-it-or-leave-it basis:
the Argentinians must accept the offer as a whole, or not at all, and
once rejected, it would be withdrawn. We would set a time limit for
their response.

Tony Parsons and Nico Henderson were both closely involved in the
drafting. We went over every point in detail, working as usual around
the oblong table in the Great Parlour upstairs, remodelling the draft
clause by clause. At hand were voluminous reference sources on the
UN and the law relating to the administration of the Falklands. We
hardened our terms in respect of interim administration, ensuring
something close to self-government for the islanders and denying any
role to the Argentine Government. We excluded South Georgia and the
other dependencies from the proposals altogether: South Georgia was
back under British control and there could be no question any longer
of including it in the negotiations. We made reference to Article 73 of
the UN Charter, which implies self-determination, to make it clear that
the wishes of the islanders would be paramount in long-term
negotiations. The Argentine Government was required to give a
response within 48 hours and there was to be no negotiation of the
terms. This exercise also allowed me subsequently to explain each
phrase to the House of Commons to allay their understandable fears
that we might be prepared to yield too much.
To keep the US informed and supportive at the UN — which was
crucial — I authorized Francis Pym to brief Al Haig about our
proposals that evening. This was a wise decision; when Mr Haig read
the text he described it as fair. The Secretary-General of the UN also
seemed impressed by the flexibility which we had shown.
I myself was closely involved in our intense diplomatic effort to
keep our support on the eve of what I knew would be decisive military
action. It was most important that the European Community countries
should continue their sanctions against Argentina, but a number of
them were faltering. I telephoned the Italian Foreign minister on
Sunday afternoon, though to little avail.
WEEK EIGHT
On Monday 17 May President Mitterrand was in London for talks and I
was able to press the argument for sanctions with him. The same

afternoon I telephoned Mr Haughey about the Irish position. I was not
convinced that this would have much impact, but the effort had to be
made. In fact the Community Foreign ministers, meeting in
Luxemburg, decided to continue with sanctions on a ‘voluntary’ basis,
which was less than ideal but much better than nothing.
On the morning of Tuesday 18 May the War Cabinet met with all
the Chiefs of Staff. It was perhaps the crucial moment. We had to
decide whether to go ahead with the landing on the Falklands; I asked
each Service Chief to give his views. The discussion was very open and
the difficulties were clear: we would be vulnerable on landing and, in
particular, there were doubts whether we had enough air cover, given
that British ships would be within easy range of Argentine attack from
the mainland and their positions would be known. We had not been
able to knock out as many Argentine ships or aircraft as we would
have liked in the weeks before the landing. And always there was the
fact that we had not been able to locate their submarines.
But it was also clear that the longer the delay, the greater the risk of
losses and the worse the condition of our troops when they had to
fight. The troops could not remain on board ship indefinitely. Of
course, no one could quantify casualties, but the judgement was that
the advantages of landing outweighed the risks of postponement. The
rules of engagement had already been agreed. The attack would be by
night.
None of us now doubted what must be done. We authorized the
landing on the basis of the Force Commander’s plan, subject to the
Cabinet’s final approval. It could be stopped any time until late on
Thursday which would allow us thoroughly to consider any reply from
the Argentinians to our proposals. The decision could thus be
cancelled or reaffirmed after Cabinet on Thursday morning. Beyond
that, the timing was for the Force Commander himself.
There was no lack of last-minute pressure for further diplomatic
concessions. Michael Foot had written to me urging further
negotiations. I replied that if we could not reach agreement with the
Argentinians on terms we regarded as acceptable we would have to
decide what further military action to take and we would answer for
our decisions to the House of Commons. Mr Haig too had to be
discouraged from bringing forward another set of proposals which
would just have allowed the Argentines to go on buying time. In fact,
on the next day, Wednesday, we received the Argentine response,
which was in effect a comprehensive rejection of our proposals. I had
never thought they would accept. Our proposals were now taken off
the table. We had decided earlier — at Francis Pym’s suggestion —
that following Argentine rejection we would publish them, and we did
so on 20 May. This was the first time during the whole of the
diplomatic manoeuvring that either side had made public their actual
negotiating position and our terms created a good international
impression.

The Secretary-General made a last-minute attempt in messages to
me and General Galtieri to put forward his own proposals. On
Thursday morning (20 May) the War Cabinet met before the full
Cabinet. Once again, Francis urged a compromise, and this time at the
eleventh hour. He suggested that the Secretary-General’s aide-mémoire
was very similar to our own proposals and that it would not be
understood if we now went ahead with military measures. But the fact
was that Sr. de Cuellar’s proposals were sketchy and unclear; to have
accepted would have put us right back at the beginning again. I
summed up very firmly. There could be no question of holding up the
military timetable. It could be fatal for our forces. If the weather was
right the landing would go ahead. The War Cabinet and later the full
Cabinet agreed.
The Secretary-General had received no reply from the Argentinians
about his aide-mémoire — on which we, in spite of all our reservations,
had offered serious comments. He admitted the failure of his efforts to
the Security Council. We published our proposals and I defended them
in the House of Commons that afternoon. The debate went well and
provided a good background for what now had to happen.
I had a full day of engagements in my constituency on Friday 21
May and I knew how important it was to carry on with business as
usual. Before lunch I had to open a large extension of Gersons’, a firm
which specializes in storage, packaging and overseas removals. There
was a military band and an audience of some 1200, including many
ambassadors. I was deeply moved, partly by the pride and patriotism
of the people there but also, of course, because I knew (as they could
not) what was due to happen at that very moment 8000 miles away. I
did all that one has to do on these occasions and even rode on a forklift truck. Then I rushed back to the constituency office to see if there
was any news. Not yet. I never telephoned Northwood on this or any
other occasion to find out about operations in progress. I knew that
the commanders on the spot had more important things to do than
answer unnecessary enquiries from London. I returned to the Finchley
office again soon after 5 p.m. and learnt by telephone and in carefully
obscure language that events were taking place, but no detail.
Later that evening, while I was at a reception in Woodhouse School,
still in the constituency, the news came over on the television. The
Union Jack was flying in San Carlos: we had returned to the Falklands.
But I was desperately anxious about casualties. Was it really possible
that we could land on that hostile coast with a fleet full of troops and
equipment without being detected?
Later that night I returned to No. 10 and John Nott brought me a
full report. The actual landing had been achieved without a single
casualty. But now it was daytime and fierce air attacks had begun. The
frigate HMS Ardent was lost. Another frigate — HMS Argonaut — and
the destroyer HMS Brilliant were badly damaged. How the Argentine

pilots missed the huge, white painted Canberra, acting as a troopship, I
will never know. But the commanders were determined to get her out
of harm’s way as quickly as possible.
In fact, the main amphibious force had moved towards San Carlos
Water, blessed with an overcast sky and poor visibility, while
diversionary raids continued elsewhere on East Falkland. Under cover
of naval gun fire, our troops had been taken ashore in landing craft,
while helicopters moved equipment and stores. Five thousand men
were safely landed, though we lost two helicopters and their crews.
The beach-head had been established, though it would take several
days for it finally to be secured.
At the Security Council, meeting in open session, Tony Parsons
defended our position against predictable rhetorical attacks from
Argentina’s allies. At the end of the debate the Irish tabled a totally
unacceptable resolution. We were able to rely on some strange allies
— and not on some of those who should have been our friends. It was
the Africans who amended the Irish resolution to the point at which
we could accept it. This became UNSCR 505, adopted unanimously on
26 May, giving the Secretary-General a mandate to seek an end to the
hostilities and full implementation of UNSCR 502.
On Saturday afternoon I visited Northwood before going on to
Chequers. By now the full scale of the Argentine air attacks was all too
apparent. To protect the operation at San Carlos, there had to be
several levels of defence. First, there were the Sea Harriers on combat
patrol flying high above the landing sites, subject to direction from the
ships below. Without the Harriers, with their extraordinary
manoeuvrability, flown with superb skill and courage, and using the
latest version of the Sidewinder air-to-air missile supplied by Caspar
Weinberger, we could not have retaken the Falklands. Second, Rapier
missile batteries had been landed with the troops and placed in the
hills around the bay. There were problems with the Rapiers: in
particular the long journey at sea had created problems for their
electronics. Then there were the air defences of the ships themselves,
some based in the bay itself and others outside in Falkland Sound —
principally long-range Sea Dart missiles on the Type 42 destroyers and
the shorter-range Sea Wolf and Sea Cat on Type 22s and other frigates,
but also anti-aircraft guns and even small arms.
At Northwood I spent some time getting up to date in the
Operations Room. I did my best to seem confident, but when I left
with Admiral Fieldhouse and we were out of earshot of anyone else, I
could not help asking him: ‘how long can we go on taking this kind of
punishment?’ He was no less worried. But he also had the ability of a
great commander to see the other side of things. And, terrible as our
losses had been and would be in the future, the fact was that we had
landed our forces successfully and that serious losses were being
inflicted on the Argentine airforce.

I should note here that we were assisted throughout by three
important weaknesses in the Argentine air offensive, though in some
ways these were the result of deliberate action on our part. First, the
Argentinians concentrated their attacks — with the later tragic
exception of the losses at Bluff Cove — on the naval escorts rather
than the troop ships and aircraft carriers. Of course, in part that was
because the escorts succeeded in shielding these units: that was their
job. Second, the Argentine aircraft were forced to fly at a very low
level to escape our missiles, with the result that the bombs they
dropped (fused for higher altitude) frequently failed to explode. (Sadly
a bomb which lodged in HMS Antelope did go off, sinking the ship,
when a brave bomb disposal expert was trying to defuse it.) Third, the
Argentinians had only a limited number of the devastating French
Exocet missiles. They made desperate attempts to increase their
arsenal. There was evidence that arms from Libya and Israel were
finding their way through South American countries to them. We for
our part were equally desperate to interdict this supply. Later, on 29
May, I was to have a telephone conversation with President Mitterrand
who told me that the French had a contract to supply Exocets to Peru,
which he had already held up and which both of us feared would be
passed on to Argentina. As always during the conflict, he was
absolutely staunch.
The Americans too, however irritating and unpredictable their
public pronouncements on occasion, were providing invaluable help. I
have already mentioned the Sidewinder missiles. They also provided
us with 150,000 square yards of matting to create a makeshift airstrip.
On 3 May Caspar Weinberger even proposed sending down the carrier
USS Eisenhower to act as a mobile runway for us in the South Atlantic
— an offer that we found more encouraging than practical.
I was working in my room at the House of Commons on the evening
of Tuesday 25 May when John Nott came in to say that the destroyer
HMS Coventry had been attacked by a wave of Argentine aircraft. Six
or more had repeatedly bombed her and she was sinking. She had, in
fact, been one of the two warships on ‘picket duty’ outside the opening
of Falkland Sound, providing early warning of air attack and an air
defence screen for the supply ships unloading in San Carlos Water. She
later capsized and sank. Nineteen members of her crew died in the
attack. John had to appear on television within half an hour.
Something of what had happened was already publicly known,
although not the name of the ship. It was thought better not to reveal
it until we had more details about the crew. Whether the decision was
right or wrong I am still not sure: the effect of not announcing the
name was that every navy family was full of anxiety. In fact, the
details were announced by John in the House of Commons the next
day.
Later the same evening I had more bad news. I had gone into the
Private Office to find out the latest about Coventry, but instead, the No.

10 duty clerk told me that the 18,000 ton Cunard container ship
Atlantic Conveyor had been hit by an Exocet missile; that the ship was
on fire and that orders had been given to abandon it. Atlantic Conveyor
was loaded with vital supplies for our forces on the Falklands. Unlike
the warships, she was unable to defend herself against missile attack
by sending up chaff. Four of those on board were killed and the
captain was drowned, though I was told later that he survived the
explosion and fires, and had been seen alive in the water. Thankfully,
though, the great majority were saved.
I knew that the Atlantic Conveyor had been carrying nineteen more
Harriers, sorely needed reinforcements. Had they still been on board?
If so, would we be able to carry on? The ship was also carrying
helicopters which were vital to the movement of troops and supplies
in the land campaign. Their loss caused our land commanders many
difficulties. Only one of the helicopters was saved. To add to our
general dismay, there was also news, based on an Argentine claim,
that HMS Invincible had been hit and damaged. And I knew that
somewhere east of the Falklands was the QE2, carrying 3,000 troops.
For me, this was one of the worst nights of the war.
Early next morning I learnt that the news was not quite so bleak. I
was told of the remarkable rescue of most members of the crews of
Coventry and the Atlantic Conveyor. The nineteen Harriers had
previously been flown onto Hermes and Invincible. Relief flooded over
me at the news: we were not fatally wounded after all, though we had
lost eight helicopters and 4,500 winter tents. Moreover, the news that
Invincible had been hit was totally false.
Stores were still being unloaded at San Carlos. Some landing and
supply craft were attacked and hit and there were unexploded bombs,
most of which were defused. Our hospital centre at San Carlos was
also hit, but the doctors carried on.
It was, though, a frustrating time for us in London. All of us were
concerned that there appeared to be little movement by our troops out
of the bridgehead. It took many days to unload the stores, equipment
and munitions. The loss of the helicopters meant that all of the earlier
plans had to be revised.
There was another worry. Would the Argentine Navy, which had
after all apparently been strongest in pressing for an invasion of our
islands, really continue to skulk in Argentine ports or would they now
come out to attack and disrupt our advance? Two British ships had
been sunk in our territorial waters around the Falklands. Perhaps we
should send our submarines to sink Argentine ships in theirs? But the
Attorney-General, Michael Havers, would not have this. So our
submarine commanders were left prowling up and down the Argentine
twelve-mile limit.
The trouble was that we knew that their ships might break out and
we might not find them quickly enough to stop them. Again, it was the

Argentine aircraft carrier, 25 de Mayo, which was the main threat. I
had been told that if possible we needed to deal with their aircraft
carrier before the landing, but for most of the time we had not been
able to find it. We feared that it had been held in reserve to oppose the
landing and that it might well appear on the Argentine national day —
25 May. Several weeks before the landing one of our submarines had
found it in the middle of a bay. It was a fine point of international law
to determine the limit of Argentine territorial waters: although the
centre of the bay was more than twelve miles from the shore, it might
be argued that the whole bay was within the limit. In the end we
decided that the ship could be attacked, but by that time she had
moved closer to the shore. The same issue arose regarding other
Argentine vessels hugging territorial waters in the south. On this
occasion Michael Havers and I had all the relevant charts laid out on
the floor in the Parlour at Chequers and did the measurements
ourselves. But the Argentinians were too careful and, unlike them, we
were determined to stay within the constraints of international law.
Somewhat to the dismay of the UN Secretary-General and Al Haig,
we made it clear that having landed we were not now prepared to
negotiate. We could no longer accept the idea of an interim
administration or proposals for mutual withdrawal of Argentine and
British troops. The Americans were again becoming worried. They had
been under ferocious verbal attacks at a meeting of the OAS on 27
May. We were put under continual pressure from Washington to avoid
the final military humiliation of Argentina, which they now seemed to
see as inevitable. I wish I could have been as confident. I knew, as
they could not, how many risks and dangers still faced us in the
campaign to recapture the islands.
This was amply demonstrated by the battle to retake Darwin and
Goose Green. The Argentinians were well prepared and dug into
strong defensive positions which had to be approached by our troops
across the open ground of a narrow isthmus. They faced heavy enemy
fire. As is well known, Colonel ‘H’ Jones, the commander of 2 Para,
lost his life in securing the way forward for his troops. His second-incommand took over and eventually took the surrender. At one point a
white flag was waved from the Argentine trenches, but when two of
our soldiers advanced in response they were shot and killed. Finally,
our commander sent two Argentine PoWs forward with a message to
surrender, saying that they could have a parade if they liked but that
they must lay down their arms. This proved acceptable. The Argentine
officers harangued their men about the justice of their cause, but they
surrendered all the same. The people of Goose Green, who had been
imprisoned inside the community hall for three weeks, were now
released. A famous battle had been won. Today there is a memorial to
the Paras near Goose Green itself and a special memorial to ‘H’.
The media had reported that our troops were about to take Goose
Green the day before the attack. I had been furious when I learnt of

this — as, I believe, had ‘H’. Too much talk was giving the
Argentinians warning of what we intended, though the fault did not
always lie with the media themselves but also with the media
management at the MoD.
On the same day that 2 Para were battling for Darwin and Goose
Green I had a meeting with Cardinal Casaroli, the Pope’s Secretary of
State. We were all very pleased that the Pope had not postponed his
visit to Britain — the first ever papal visit here — in spite of the fact
that we were at war with a predominantly Catholic country. We
recognized the difficulties which a visit at this time might cause him,
however, and decided that it would be best if none of the Cabinet met
him personally. I had, of course, already talked to the Pope on an
earlier occasion and admired his principle and courage. I explained to
Cardinal Casaroli what we were fighting for: I said that war was a
terrible evil, but there were worse things, including the extinction of
all that one believed in. We could not allow aggression to succeed. Nor
could we bargain away the freedom, justice and democracy which the
Falkland Islanders had enjoyed for so long and simply hand them over
to Argentina, where these things were unknown. We made no public
comment at the time, but I hoped that something of this message
might be transmitted to the Argentinians: for the Pope was to visit
Argentina after leaving Britain.
Unfortunately, the Americans now sought to revive diplomatic
negotiation. Al Haig wanted to involve the Brazilians in a settlement
which (contrary to what he had earlier suggested) must, he claimed,
come before the final defeat of the Argentine forces on the island.
These proposals were really the wrong ones at very much the wrong
time. We had already made it clear that unconditional Argentine
withdrawal and the return of British administration were now our
goals. But I knew that we could not afford to alienate the United
States, particularly at this stage. We kept in contact with Mr Haig both
about the question of how to provide for and repatriate Argentine
prisoners of war and more generally about our plans for the long-term
future of the islands.
What would have been quite wrong was to snatch diplomatic defeat
out of the jaws of military victory — as I had to tell President Reagan
when he telephoned me late at night on Monday 31 May. It was not
very satisfactory for either of us that I should not have had advance
warning of what he was likely to say and as a result I was perhaps
more forceful than friendly. The President had, it seems, again been
speaking to the President of Brazil who shared his view that the best
chance for peace was before the Argentinians suffered complete
humiliation. As the UK now had the upper hand militarily, we should
strike a deal. I could not accept this. I told him that we could not
contemplate a cease-fire without Argentine withdrawal. Having lost
ships and lives because for seven weeks the Argentinians refused to
negotiate, we would not consider handing the islands over to a third

party. I understood the President’s fears. But I asked him to put
himself in my position. I was sure that he would have acted in the
same way as I did if Alaska — part of his own country, inhabited by
his own people — had been similarly threatened. Moreover, I agreed
with an excellent television interview he had given in which he had
said that if the aggressor were to win, some fifty other territories,
affected by similar disputes, would be at risk. This conversation was a
little painful at the time but it had a worthwhile effect. The Americans
now clearly understood our position and intentions. I would have a
further opportunity shortly to talk to President Reagan in person
during the forthcoming G7 summit at Versailles.
In the meantime, we had to deal delicately with a five-point peace
plan which had been advanced by the UN Secretary-General. The
pressure for a cease-fire sponsored by the UN Security Council was
growing. On Wednesday 2 June after the Secretary-General had
announced that he had given up his own efforts, Spain and Panama,
on behalf of Argentina, sought to press to the vote an apparently
innocuous Draft Resolution on a cease-fire which would have had
exactly the effect we were determined to avoid. It was touch and go
whether the Spanish would even now manage to obtain the necessary
nine votes which would force us to veto the resolution. We ourselves
lobbied as hard as possible. The vote was postponed until Friday.
At noon that day I flew to Paris for the G7. My first and most
important meeting was, of course, with President Reagan who was
staying at the US Embassy. We talked alone, as he preferred it. I
thanked him for the great help we had received from the United
States. I asked him what the Americans could do to help repatriate the
Argentine PoWs. I also requested that the American vote should
support us at the Security Council.
The mood at Versailles seemed very different from that which was
now prevailing at the UN in New York. The heads of government were
staying in the Petit Trianon. After dinner we had a long discussion
about the Falklands and the response was generally sympathetic and
helpful. Later the British delegation and I withdrew to the sitting-room
which we had been allocated. We had been talking for about fifteen
minutes when a message came through from the Foreign Office and
Tony Parsons that a vote was about to be taken in the Security Council
and that the Japanese were voting against us. As theirs was the ninth
vote required for the resolution to pass this was particularly irritating.
So much for the previous undertakings of cooperation. I tried hard to
contact Mr Suzuki, the Japanese Prime Minister, to persuade him to
reverse the decision and at least abstain. He could not possibly have
gone to bed in such a short time. But I was told that he could not be
reached.
Attention was, in fact, somewhat diverted from our problems by the
extraordinary behaviour of the US Ambassador to the United Nations,
Mrs Kirkpatrick. Having cast her veto alongside ours, she announced

only minutes later that if the vote could be taken again she would, on
instructions just received, abstain. Ironically, this rather helped us by
distracting media attention from our veto. However, that had not been
the intention. Apparently, succumbing to pressure from the Latin
American countries, Al Haig had telephoned her from Versailles telling
her to withdraw her vote of support from us but she had not received
the message in time. There was a still more embarrassing sequel to this
event for the United States. Just before lunch in the Palace of
Versailles, the television cameras were allowed in and an American
journalist asked President Reagan what had lain behind the US
confusion at the United Nations the previous evening. To my
amazement, he said that he did not know anything about it. He had
not been told. The journalist then turned to me. I had no intention of
rubbing salt into a friend’s wounds, so all I said was that I did not give
interviews over lunch.
That same morning the Japanese Prime Minister gave me an
extremely lame explanation of Japan’s vote in support of the
resolution, claiming that he believed that it would lead to Argentine
withdrawal. However, President Mitterrand’s summing up at his press
conference after the conclusion of the G7 was excellent and totally
supportive.
Neither Tony Parsons nor I was particularly surprised that we had
finally had to use our veto. In retrospect, we were very lucky — and it
was a tribute also to Tony Parsons’s skill — that we had not had to
veto such a resolution much earlier.
By now, my thoughts were again on what was happening in the
Falklands. Our troops had struck out against other Argentine positions.
There had been no Argentine counter-attack. Major-General Moore
had arrived to assume command of all land operations and the 5th
Infantry Brigade (5 Brigade), reinforcing our troops on the islands, had
landed on 1 June. The main problem was to transport enough
equipment and ammunition forward in preparation for the final
assault on the ring of mountains which protect Port Stanley.
President Reagan arrived in Britain on Monday evening on an
official visit and I met him at the airport. The next day he was due to
speak to Members of both Houses of Parliament. But it is the terrible
losses we suffered at Bluff Cove which are etched on my mind for that
day. The landing ships, Sir Tristram and Sir Galahad, full of men,
equipment and munitions, had been sent round to Bluff Cove and
Fitzroy in preparation for the final assault on Port Stanley. The clouds
cleared while the ships were still unloading the Rapier missiles which
would protect them from air attack and the Argentinians scored hits
on both. Sir Galahad had not discharged its troops and the result was
great loss of life and many survivors were left with terrible burns. The
Welsh Guards took the brunt of it. As on all these occasions, the
natural reaction was ‘if only’ — above all, if only the men had been
taken off and dispersed as soon as they arrived then nothing like this

number of casualties would have been suffered. But the losses would
have been even greater were it not for the heroism of the helicopter
pilots. They hovered close to the burning oil slicks around the ship and
used the draught from their rotors to blow life rafts full of survivors
away from the inferno into which they were being drawn.
Again, there were almost insuperable problems in releasing news of
casualties. Rumours of very large numbers were spread by the
Argentinians. Families were frantically worried. But we decided to
hold up details of the numbers lost — although of course (as always)
relatives were individually informed. We knew from intelligence that
the Argentinians thought that our casualties were several times worse
than they were and that they believed this would hold up our attack
on Port Stanley. The attack on Mount Longdon, Two Sisters and
Wireless Ridge was due to begin on Friday night. Surprise was vital.
I hoped against hope that our worst losses were behind us. But early
on the morning of Saturday 12 June the No. 10 duty clerk came up to
the flat with a note. I all but seized it from him, expecting it to say
that the attack on the mountains around Port Stanley had begun. But
the news was very different. I kept the note, which reads:
HMS Glamorgan struck by suspected Exocet missile. Ship is in position 51/58
South. Large fire in vicinity of hangar and in gas turbine and gear room.
Power still available. Ship making ten knots to the South.

–MoD as yet have no details of casualties and wouldn’t expect them for
several hours. They will keep us informed.

Glamorgan had been bombarding the Argentine positions in Port
Stanley and on the hills around before the forthcoming battle. She had
in fact been hit by a land-based Exocet while on her way out of the
area.
How bitterly depressed I was. At moments like this I felt almost
guilty at the comfort, protection and safety in No. 10 while there was
so much danger and death in the South Atlantic. That day was the
Trooping of the Colour for the Queen’s birthday. For the only time that
I can remember the ceremony was marred by a downpour of rain. It
was unpleasant for the Guards, but with the news so bad and the
uncertainty so great, it seemed appropriate. I wore black, for I felt that
there was much to mourn. John Nott arrived shortly before I was to
take my place on the stand. He had no further news. But he thought he
would have been told if the attack had not started. Afterwards,
dripping wet, the guests, including Rex and Mrs Hunt, dried out before
the fires in No. 10 as best we could.
Shortly before 1 o’clock we heard that all our military objectives
had been achieved. But there had been a stiff battle. Two Sisters,
Mount Harriet and Mount Longdon had been secured. The plan had
been to press on that night to take Mount Tumbledown, still closer to
Port Stanley, but the troops were tired and more time was needed to
bring up ammunition, so it was decided to wait. I went up to

Northwood that afternoon to hear precisely what was happening.
There was better news there about Glamorgan; her fires were under
control and she was steaming at 20 knots.
More than ever, the outcome now lay in the hands of our soldiers on
the Falklands, not with the politicians. Like everyone else in Britain, I
was glued to the radio for news — strictly keeping to my self-imposed
rule not to telephone while the conflict was underway. On my way
back from Chequers to No. 10, that Sunday (13 June), I went via
Northwood to learn what I could. What was to turn out to be the final
assault was bitterly fought, particularly at Mount Tumbledown where
the Argentinians were well prepared. But Tumbledown, Mount
William and Wireless Ridge fell to our forces, who were soon on the
outskirts of Stanley.
I visited the islands seven months later and saw the terrain for
myself, walking the ground at first light in driving wind and rain,
wending my way around those grim outcrops of rock which made
natural fortifications for the Argentine defenders. Our boys had had to
cover the ground and take the positions in thick darkness. It could
only have been done by the most professional and disciplined of
forces.
When the War Cabinet met on Monday morning all that we knew
was that the battle was still in progress. The speed with which the end
came took all of us by surprise. The Argentinians were weary,
demoralized and very badly led — as ample evidence at the time and
later showed. They had had enough. They threw down their arms and
could be seen retreating through their own minefields into Stanley.
That evening, having learnt the news, I went to the House of
Commons to announce the victory. I could not get into my own room;
it was locked and the Chief Whip’s assistant had to search for the key.
I then wrote out on a scrap of paper which I found somewhere on my
desk the short statement which, there being no other procedural
means, I would have to make on a Point of Order to the House. At 10
p.m. I rose and told them that it had been reported that there were
white flags flying over Port Stanley. The war was over. We all felt the
same and the cheers showed it. Right had prevailed. And when I went
to sleep very late that night I realized how great the burden was which
had been lifted from my shoulders.
For the nation as a whole, though the daily memories, fears and
even the relief would fade, pride in our country’s achievement would
not. In a speech I made in Cheltenham a little later, on Saturday 3
July, I tried to express what the Falklands spirit meant:
We have ceased to be a nation in retreat. We have instead a newfound
confidence — born in the economic battles at home and tested and found
true 8000 miles away … And so today we can rejoice at our success in the
Falklands and take pride in the achievement of the men and women of our
task force. But we do so, not as at some flickering of a flame which must
soon be dead. No — we rejoice that Britain has rekindled that spirit which

has fired her for generations past and which today has begun to burn as
brightly as before. Britain found herself again in the South Atlantic and will
not look back from the victory she has won.

CHAPTER IX

Generals, Commissars and Mandarins
Meeting the military and political challenge of communism from the
autumn of 1979 to the spring of 1983

PEACE AND ARMAMENTS
On Wednesday 23 June 1982 I travelled to New York to attend a
special session of the General Assembly on disarmament, which the
United Nations had called while the Falklands campaign was still in
progress. The speech I made expressed my view of the role of defence
and negotiations on disarmament with singular clarity. I had become
increasingly unhappy about the language used on such occasions.
Everyone talked about peace as if that in itself were the sole aim. But
peace is not enough without freedom and justice and sometimes — as
we were demonstrating in the Falklands — it was necessary to
sacrifice peace if freedom and justice were to prevail. I was also
convinced that much cant was spoken about the arms race, as if by
slowing down the process of improving our defences we would make
peace more certain. History had repeatedly demonstrated quite the
opposite.
I began by quoting President Roosevelt: ‘We, born to freedom and
believing in freedom, would rather die on our feet than live on our
knees.’ I then went on to note that nuclear war was indeed a terrible
threat, but conventional war a terrible reality. Since the atomic bombs
dropped by the Americans on Hiroshima and Nagasaki there had been
no conflicts in which nuclear weapons had been used — but some 140
conflicts fought with conventional weapons in which approaching 10
million people had died. In any case:
The fundamental risk to peace is not the existence of weapons of particular
types. It is the disposition on the part of some states to impose change on
others by resorting to force against other nations and not in ‘arms races’,
whether real or imaginary. Aggressors do not start wars because an
adversary has built up his own strength. They start wars because they
believe they can gain more by going to war than by remaining at peace … I
do not believe that armaments cause wars [nor that] action on them alone
will … prevent wars. It is not merely a mistaken analysis but an evasion of
responsibility to suppose that we can prevent the horrors of war by focusing
on its instruments. They are more often symptoms than causes.

This was the analysis which underlay the defence and security
policies I intended the Government to pursue. It provided me with a
view of international power politics without which we would have had
no clear sense of direction. But of course it did not of itself resolve
particular problems. Throughout my first years in office I repeatedly

found myself trying to reconcile five different objectives. First, there
could only be strictly limited resources available for defence,
particularly when the economy was growing slowly or not at all. This
meant that although defence expenditure was increased, it was vital
that better value for money be obtained. Second, we had regularly to
assess the priority we would give to the demands of NATO policy and
those other areas of British interest outside the NATO area. Third,
Britain had to help ensure that NATO responded effectively to the
steadily increasing Soviet military threat. Fourth, as part of this, it was
vital to maintain western unity behind American leadership. Britain,
among European countries, and I, among European leaders, were
uniquely placed to do that. Finally, nowhere more than in defence and
foreign policy does what I have come to consider ‘Thatcher’s law’
apply — in politics the unexpected happens. You have to be prepared
and able to face it. There was to be no lack of examples in my years in
office.
THE MILITARY BALANCE
Well before I entered Downing Street I was preoccupied with the
balance of military power between the NATO alliance and the Warsaw
Pact. NATO has always been a defensive alliance of western style
democracies. It was founded in April 1949 in response to the growing
aggression of Soviet policy, made plain by events such as the Sovietbacked communist takeover in Czechoslovakia and the Berlin blockade
the previous year. Although the United States is the leading power in
NATO, ultimately it can only seek to persuade not coerce. In such a
relationship the danger of dissension always exists. The Soviet aim,
only thinly disguised, right up until the time when a united Germany
remained in NATO, was to drive a wedge between America and her
European allies. I always regarded it as one of Britain’s most important
roles to see that such a strategy failed.
There are other fundamental differences between NATO and its
opponents. The democratic freedoms our peoples enjoy make it in
practice impossible for the state to take more than a certain share of
national income for military purposes. Moreover, the openness of our
western societies, though they make us stronger perhaps when
sacrifice is required in a manifest crisis, also make us slow to respond
to insidious threats. Democracies do not, with very few exceptions,
start wars. The only threat NATO ever posed to the Soviet bloc is the
threat that ideas of freedom and justice pose to the masters of captive
nations.
But from its foundation in May 1955 the Warsaw Pact was always
an instrument of Soviet power. In 1956 in Hungary and 1968 in
Czechoslovakia the Soviets had shown that any movement in eastern
Europe which might threaten their own military interests would be
crushed without mercy or apology. The experts might and did argue

about the precise details of Soviet military doctrine. But what was
clear to me and to anyone prepared to reflect on past events and
present circumstances was that the Soviets and their Warsaw Pact
‘allies’ could not be trusted to refrain from adventurism in Europe any
more than in the Third World.
Moreover, by the time we took office the Soviets were ruthlessly
pressing ahead to gain military advantage. Soviet military spending,
which was believed to be some five times the published figures, took
between 12 and 14 per cent of the Soviet Union’s GNP.* The Warsaw
Pact outnumbered NATO by three-to-one in main battle tanks and
artillery and by more than two-to-one in tactical aircraft. Moreover,
the Soviets were rapidly improving the quality of their equipment —
tanks, submarines, surface ships and aircraft. The build-up of the
Soviet Navy enabled them to project their power across the world.
Improvements in Soviet anti-ballistic missile defences threatened the
credibility of the alliance’s nuclear deterrent — not least the British
independent deterrent — at the same time as the Soviets were
approaching parity in strategic missiles with the United States.
INTERMEDIATE-RANGE NUCLEAR WEAPONS (INF)
It was, however, in what in the jargon are known as ‘long-range
theatre nuclear forces’ (LRTNF) — usually called intermediate-range
nuclear forces (INF) — that the most pressing and difficult decisions
were required. The so-called ‘dual-track’ agreement to modernize
NATO’s medium-range nuclear weapons, while engaging in talks with
the Soviet Union on arms control, had been taken in principle by the
previous Labour Government; whether they would have seen the
decision through to deployment I somewhat doubt.
This agreement was needed to deal with the threat from new Soviet
nuclear weapons. The Soviet SS-20 mobile ballistic missiles and their
new supersonic Backfire bomber could strike western European targets
from the territory of the Soviet Union. But the Americans had no
equivalent weapons stationed on European soil. The only NATO
weapons able to strike the USSR from Europe were those carried by
the ageing UK Vulcan bombers and the F1–11s stationed in Britain.
Both forces could be vulnerable to a Soviet first strike. Of course, the
United States could be expected by an attacking Soviet army at some
point to have recourse to its own strategic nuclear weapons. But the
essence of deterrence is its credibility. Now that the Soviet Union had
achieved a broad parity in strategic nuclear weapons, some thought
that this reduced the likelihood of the United States taking such
action. In any case, there were many in Europe who suggested that the
United States would not risk its own cities in defence of Europe.
Why would the Soviets wish to acquire this new capability to win
nuclear war in Europe? The answer was that they hoped ultimately to
split the alliance.

For NATO, however, the possession of effective medium-range
nuclear forces in Europe had a very different purpose. NATO’s strategy
was based on having a range of conventional and nuclear weapons so
that the USSR could never be confident of overcoming NATO at one
level of weaponry without triggering a response at a higher level
leading ultimately to full-scale nuclear war. This strategy of ‘flexible
response’ would not be effective if there were no Europe-based nuclear
weapons as a link between the conventional and strategic nuclear
response. NATO knew that the Warsaw Pact forces would never be
held for more than a short time if they attacked with all the strength
at their disposal in central Europe. That is why NATO repeatedly
pledged that although it would never use military force first, it could
not play into the Soviet hands of renouncing first use of nuclear
weapons once it had been attacked. So only by modernizing its
intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe could NATO’s strategy
retain its credibility. It was clear from the first that this would not be
easy.
On the morning of Friday 11 May 1979 I discussed the issue with
Helmut Schmidt in London. He was very concerned at the effect on
German public opinion of stationing more nuclear missiles on German
soil, although of course he had been one of the principal authors of the
strategy. The Americans had developed a longer range equivalent of
the Pershing missiles already stationed in West Germany and Cruise
missiles, which could be launched from the air, sea or land. At this
stage Helmut Schmidt still hankered after a sea-based system, though
he later reluctantly accepted the advantages of the ground-launched
Cruise missile (GLCM). He was under strong pressure from within his
own party and placed equal emphasis on the second aspect of the ‘dual
track’ approach — that is for the US to negotiate for the removal of
the Soviet threat at the same time as we were preparing to deploy our
own weapons. He also insisted that West Germany should not be the
only recipient of these missiles which was a non-nuclear state.* In
sharp contrast to future debate in Britain, the Germans were adamant
that the nuclear weapons should have no ‘dual key’: they must be able
to say to the rest of the world that they did not own or control nuclear
weapons.
On the morning of Wednesday 13 June I saw Al Haig, who was at
that time the outgoing Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. We
discussed not only questions of nuclear policy but also what we knew
of the threat posed by Soviet preparations for offensive chemical
warfare, which I found deeply disquieting. I said that although my
initial reaction to my first briefings on the East/West military balance
had been one of concern, my considered conclusion was that the
West’s superiority in human and material resources would enable us to
respond to any challenge. But that did not diminish my worry about
our immediate problems. On the evening of Tuesday 24 July I saw
General Haig’s successor, General Bernard Rogers, and expressed my

anxiety about the lead enjoyed by the Warsaw Pact forces in the
matter of standardization of weapons and equipment and about the
vulnerability of NATO’s own organization to Soviet penetration.
The deadline which NATO had set itself for achieving a firm
decision on the new intermediate-range missiles was the end of that
year, 1979. The longer we waited, the greater the opportunities for
Soviet campaigns of propaganda and disinformation to do their work.
On Wednesday 19 September the small group of ministers which I
chaired to consider nuclear policy decided that the UK would accept
the basing of our allotted 144 American owned GLCMs. I had received
a telephone call from Helmut Schmidt asking if we could accept a
further flight of 16 Cruise missiles. The Germans wished to reduce
their own number and in order to prevent any further time being lost
in argument I immediately agreed to the request. With Britain and
West Germany remaining solid the West’s strategy could be accounted
a success. But would others follow our lead?
A week earlier I had already seen Prime Minister Martens of
Belgium for talks in Downing Street. The Belgians were looking over
their shoulder at the Dutch, whose Government’s future was
endangered by rifts and popular agitation against deployment of
nuclear weapons. The Belgians were particularly important because if
the Dutch, and possibly also the Italians, failed to go along with the
decision which would soon be required, Chancellor Schmidt’s own
position would become perilous and it was of crucial importance to
the alliance to shore up West German commitment. I told M. Martens
that I wondered whether western European leaders were giving a
sufficiently effective lead to public opinion. My own experience was
that audiences were always quick to respond when addressed about
the extent of the Soviet threat and about the need for us to have
credible defences. I thought it was all a matter of resolve.
By contrast, I felt reassured — and said so — by the resolute attitude
of the Italian Prime Minister, Sig. Cossiga, when I talked with him in
Rome on Friday 5 October. He told me that Italy would make a
positive decision on deployment. He intended to exert maximum
pressure at his forthcoming meeting with the Dutch Prime Minister,
Mr Van Agt, and hoped that I would do the same.
However, during this time the Soviets were at work trying to
undermine NATO’s unity. As I frequently pointed out in my
discussions, they had been brilliantly successful in rousing popular
feeling against the neutron bomb which President Carter had been
considering deploying. In the months and years to come it would be
clear that they had by no means lost their touch.
On Saturday 6 October, President Brezhnev made a speech in East
Berlin containing a number of proposals. He announced the
withdrawal of 20,000 Soviet troops and 1,000 tanks from East
Germany in the next 12 months. He also offered to reduce Soviet
intermediate-range nuclear systems if no ‘additional’ medium-range

nuclear weapons were deployed in western Europe. Judged against the
huge Soviet superiority in conventional forces the reductions, though
of course welcome, were more cosmetic than of substance. But the
proposals on theatre nuclear weapons were a good deal worse. We
knew that the accuracy, ability to penetrate, mobility and the range of
targets covered by these Soviet missiles and aircraft had increased
enormously. Moreover, such missiles were targeted on western Europe
from points beyond the Urals. Mr Brezhnev’s proposals — like those
which followed them — would have left the Soviets in possession of a
weapon which could strike at Europe and to which we had no
equivalent effective response. However, such proposals inevitably
increased the temptation, in the Netherlands for example, to put all
the emphasis on arms control and delay the decision on modernization
and deployment.
I discussed the situation with Chancellor Schmidt again — in Bonn
this time — on Wednesday 31 October. How were we to help the
Dutch take the right decision at the forthcoming NATO meeting? I
suggested that the whole of the Dutch Cabinet, which appeared to be
split, should see the impressive NATO presentation on the military
balance in Europe. Helmut Schmidt was pressing for the United States
to offer to withdraw unilaterally 1,000 obsolete nuclear warheads
from the Federal Republic. The Americans agreed with this and
President Carter wrote to me about it. All my instincts were against
unilateral gestures of this sort. But I could see the practical arguments
for it and with some reluctance supported the offer — not that it had
much noticeable effect on Dutch opinion or the Dutch Government. In
fact, the Germans at about this time seemed to become reconciled to
the prospect of the Dutch failing to agree to deployment, though it was
clear that they themselves would remain firm as long as the Italians
and Belgians did so. On Friday 23 November Mr Gromyko visited
Bonn and gave a press conference which was evidently intended to
shake European and particularly German opinion, warning that arms
control negotiations could not take place if the West pursued what he
described as a ‘new arms race’.
On the evening of Thursday 6 December I met the Dutch Prime
Minister for talks and dinner in Downing Street. I always got on well
with him, but I did not envy his position. The notorious instability of
coalition governments of the sort he led makes it immensely difficult
to get clear decisions and stick to them. On this occasion, Mr Van Agt
explained to me in some detail the difficulties he was facing.
Apparently, half the sermons in Dutch churches were now dealing
with nuclear disarmament and the issue of deployment was
endangering his Government’s survival. I agreed with him that the fall
of a NATO member government on a NATO issue would be a very
serious development. But I added that NATO would have to go ahead
with the decision to deploy theatre nuclear weapons or else the
alliance would lose its credibility and its purpose. The Netherlands

could reserve its position while waiting to see what the attitude of the
Soviet Government was in arms control negotiations. The Russians
were playing their traditional psychological game to discourage NATO
from taking decisions and they must not be allowed to get away with
it.
In fact, in an act of remarkable courage in the face of so much
domestic and Soviet opposition, the NATO ministers made the
required decision in Brussels on 12 December. The arms control
proposals, including the American offer to withdraw 1,000 nuclear
warheads from Europe, were agreed. Most important, the alliance
agreed to the deployment in Europe of all the 572 new American
missiles which had been envisaged. The reservations entered by the
Belgian and Dutch Governments were less serious than at one time had
seemed likely. The Belgians agreed to accept a share of these missiles,
subject to reconsideration after six months in the light of the progress
of arms control negotiations. The Dutch Government accepted the
proposals as a whole but postponed the decision to take a share of the
missiles in Holland until the end of 1981. The latter date was in any
case well before any proposed deployment could in practice begin.
Of course, this was not the end of the matter. In June the following
year we announced the sites of the Cruise missiles in Britain —
Greenham Common in Berkshire and Molesworth in Cambridgeshire.
From that time on Greenham was to be the focus for an increasingly
strident unilateralist campaign.
The Soviet Union’s own alternating bribes and threats continued to
work on European public opinion. I was asked in a Dutch television
interview on 4 February 1981, when I was on a return visit to see Mr
Van Agt, about resistance to stationing Cruise missiles in Holland and
Germany. I replied:
I sometimes wish that those who do resist [Cruise missiles] would really turn
all their effort to saying to the Soviet Union: ‘Look! You have the most
modern, up-to-date theatre nuclear weapons in the SS-20 … you have them
targeted on every country in Europe. You increase their numbers at the rate
of rather more than one a week. Do you really expect us to sit back and do
nothing? If you want us not to have Cruise missiles in Europe, as a deterrent
to your using yours, then dismantle yours! Take them down! Agree to be
inspected so that we do know what you are doing!’ … I know the worries. I
do not like nuclear weapons either, but I value my freedom and my
children’s freedom, and their children’s freedom and I am determined that it
shall continue.

I learnt afterwards that such plain speaking as this was a rare thing
in the Netherlands.
THE PURCHASE OF TRIDENT
Another early decision which we had to take, with the greatest longterm consequence for Britain, related to our independent nuclear

deterrent. Britain had four nuclear-armed Polaris submarines. The
previous Conservative and Labour governments had pressed ahead
with a programme of improvement to our Polaris missiles. The
programme, code-named Chevaline, had been paid for and managed
by the United Kingdom in co-operation with the United States, using
some of their facilities for trials and tests. The upgraded Polaris system
would maintain the full effectiveness of our strategic deterrent into the
1990s, though at a cost which had alarmingly escalated as the
development continued. However, for a variety of technical and
operational reasons we could not responsibly plan for the continuance
of this system much into the 1990s. If Britain was to retain its
deterrent a decision would shortly have to be made about Polaris’s
ultimate replacement, given the time required to design or obtain new
strategic nuclear forces of the sophistication necessary.
We began to look at the options from almost the first days in
government. These quickly proved a good deal narrower than they at
first appeared, though inevitably they seemed wider to those without
access to all the information. By late September 1979 we had
discarded the option of a successor force of air-launched Cruise
missiles because they would be too vulnerable to attack. The
possibility of co-operation with France, which retained its own
independent deterrent, was rejected for technological reasons. From an
early stage the American Trident looked the most promising option.
We had received firm assurances that the SALT II Agreement,
reached between Presidents Carter and Brezhnev in June 1979, would
not affect the situation regarding our own deterrent. But our aim was,
if possible, to conclude an agreement with the Americans on
purchasing Trident before the end of that year, so that it could not get
caught up in the argument in the run-up to the expected ratification by
the US Senate of the treaty. We also wished to have the decision made
before President Carter became too preoccupied with the 1980
presidential election. The Trident missile included the advanced and
very important technology of multiple nuclear warheads, each
separately targetted (MIRVs). Not only was this the most up-to-date
and therefore credible system — as measured against Soviet antisubmarine warfare capability and anti-ballistic missile defences — but
by purchasing it from the Americans we could hope to avoid
immensely expensive improvement programmes like Chevaline. On 6
December 1979 the ministers concerned agreed that the best system to
replace Polaris was the Trident I (C4) MIRV system if it could be
purchased from the US, less the warheads and the submarines carrying
the system which would be produced in Britain. The decision was later
confirmed by Cabinet.
But at this point the most troublesome and annoying complications
began. Although President Carter told me that he would supply us
with whatever we needed he was desperately worried that news of his
decision would cause him political difficulties. He had invested great

political capital in the SALT II Agreement whose chances of being
ratified by the Senate were already in doubt. He was worried that the
Soviets might respond to his agreement to supply Trident with some
action which would result in a failure to ratify. Consequently, I was
not able to speak openly about the matter when I saw him with his
colleagues in Washington. The Americans were also keen to ensure
that the announcement on Trident did not occur before the scheduled
12 December meeting of NATO to decide on deploying Cruise and
Pershing. I could see the sense of this. But in view of the problems
which SALT II was facing I began to be anxious lest the decision on
Trident be postponed well into 1980.
With the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan at the end of the year the
prospects of ratifying SALT II immediately sharply receded. But at this
point the US Administration said that it was reluctant to announce the
Trident decision because it could be seen as an overreaction to events
in Afghanistan. The Americans were similarly unduly worried about
the attitude of Chancellor Schmidt to the Trident decision. More hardheadedly, the Carter Administration also pressed strongly for both
political and financial returns on the decision to supply us with
Trident. They wanted us to agree to a form of words which would
commit us to expanding our defence efforts. They were also keen to
develop their defence facilities at our island of Diego Garcia in the
Indian Ocean — something for which I had a good deal of sympathy.
There was the matter of a substantial levy which we would be charged
for American research and development costs which they were not
prepared to waive.
I was not happy about some of these demands: it seemed to me that
it was as much in America’s interests as ours that we should have an
independent strategic deterrent which would, like Polaris, be assigned
to NATO and, except where the UK Government decided that supreme
national interests were at stake, would be used for the purposes of
international defence of the western alliance. As with the question of
theatre nuclear weapons, it was the Soviet perception of the strategic
threat which would ultimately determine its credibility — and
whatever doubts they might have about America’s willingness to
launch strategic nuclear weapons in defence of Britain, they would
never doubt that a British Conservative Government would do so.
On the afternoon of Monday 2 June 1980, however, I finalized the
terms in discussion with Dr Harold Brown, the able US Defence
Secretary, in Downing Street. I said that Britain wanted to purchase
the Trident I missile on the same terms as regards research and
development as Polaris, that is paying a 5 per cent levy. Dr Brown
would not agree to this and said that it would have been severely
criticized in Congress. But he would accept it providing the British
Government bore the cost of manning the Rapier Air Defence Systems
which the US intended to purchase for their bases in Britain. I agreed.
I also agreed with the objective of extending and increasing US use of

the base at Diego Garcia; but this made sense on its own merits and
had nothing to do with the Trident decision. Dr Brown accepted this.
At last the decision was effectively made and I wrote formally to
President Carter requesting purchase of Trident, simultaneously
informing President Giscard, Chancellor Schmidt and Prime Minister
Cossiga. The decision was announced to the House by Francis Pym on
15 July and at Francis’s suggestion fully debated and endorsed on 3
March 1981.
In the summer of 1980 we thought that we had made our final
decision on the independent nuclear deterrent. But it was not to be.
President Reagan came into office in 1981 with a programme of
modernizing US strategic nuclear forces, including Trident. On 24
August the new US Defence Secretary, Caspar Weinberger, wrote to
me to confirm that President Reagan had now decided to use the
Trident II (D5) missile in the Trident submarines. The US
Administration would make this missile available to us if we wished to
buy it. On 1 October President Reagan formally told me of his
decision.
I well understood and indeed supported President Reagan’s decision
to improve the US strategic nuclear capability. I was worried about the
advances which the Soviet Union had made both in their technology
and in numbers of weapons. However, we now faced a new situation.
If we were still to go ahead with Trident I we risked spending huge
sums on a system that would be outdated and increasingly difficult to
maintain as the Americans went over to Trident II. But if we were to
accept President Reagan’s generous offer of the new technology
represented by Trident II we risked the increasing costs of any new
project. Moreover, a number of political difficulties arose.
In November 1981 a group of ministers met to discuss what we
should do. We argued out all the questions between us; and all the
arguments which would be raised in the outside world were discussed,
including some feeble and unrealistic ones. One colleague was
concerned at the impact on public opinion of choosing a still more
powerful missile. Another raised the question whether it would be
more difficult to keep a Trident II nuclear strategic force out of future
arms control negotiations, as we had managed hitherto. A third was
inclined to support the case for Trident II but with fewer missiles. Yet
another, while accepting that Trident II was better than the
alternatives, felt that the choice raised the more fundamental question
of whether the UK could afford to continue to maintain an
independent strategic nuclear deterrent at all. For my part I had two
anxieties. One was, as I noted above, that the cost of a completely new
missile now being developed was bound to be uncertain and on past
performance was likely to escalate. The other was my unease about
the implications for the strategic deterrent of Soviet developments in
anti-ballistic missile defence, including particle beam and laser
weapons — a possibility to which I had been alerted some years

earlier but which became a matter of public debate only when
President Reagan proposed his SDI initiative in March 1983.
In January 1982 we had a further and fuller discussion based on a
presentation. The more we considered the question the more it seemed
that if we were to maintain a credible deterrent, which I was utterly
determined we should do, we must indeed have the Trident II. But we
must get it on the best possible terms. The issue was put to Cabinet
later that month and on 1 February I sent a message to President
Reagan saying that I would send officials to Washington to discuss
terms.
Again, as with President Carter’s Administration, there was plenty of
hard bargaining. But I always knew that President Reagan and Caspar
Weinberger would be conscious of Britain’s and the alliance’s longterm interests and would ultimately do what they believed to be right
in defence terms, rather than just expedient or popular with the
Congress. As before, the whole question of charges and levies arose.
We for our part pressed hard for a fixed percentage of the work on the
development of Trident to go to UK sub-contractors. The Americans
who were building up their own navy were anxious to discourage us
from reducing our surface fleet which we were intending to do
following the Defence Review that year. We indicated the possibility
of reprieving the amphibious landing ships HMS Fearless and HMS
Intrepid, which pleased them. They also pressed for an extension of our
armed forces’ engagement in Belize, which has now become a virtually
permanent commitment.
In the end, we concluded an agreement with the United States to
buy Trident II on more advantageous terms than Trident I. The missile
was to be purchased by us at the same price as the United States
Navy’s own requirements in accordance with the Polaris Sales
Agreement. But the additional overheads and levies would be lower
than would have been the case under the 1980 Agreement to purchase
Trident I. In particular, the so-called R & D levy would be a fixed sum
in real terms and there would be a complete waiver of the facilities
charge which was part of the Trident I deal. The terms protected us
completely from the escalation of the development cost. The United
States would set up a liaison office in London to advise British industry
on how to compete on equal terms with US industry for sub-contracts
for the Trident II programme as a whole, including the American
programme. We also decided to improve and increase the size of the
submarines which would carry Trident, making them more efficient
and less detectable, and by running longer between refits make them
more available for patrol. The total cost of Trident II and the other
changes over the whole period would be £7.5 billion, just over 3 per
cent of the total defence budget over the same period. When I learnt of
the terms now being offered I was delighted and I gladly authorized
their acceptance.

THE DEFENCE REVIEW
It is sometimes forgotten, now that the map of Europe and indeed the
world has been reshaped with the fall of communism, just how painful
were the consequences of the West’s efforts to strengthen its defence
effort in the 1980s. The United States was as a result unable to reduce
its public spending, with the consequence that the world faced higher
interest rates, threatening economic recovery. We in Britain, for our
part, had to match the necessary commitment to strengthen our
defence with rigorous evaluation of what we could afford and where
resources could be best applied. Economic, strategic and technical
arguments alike pointed towards a thorough review of our defence
commitments and how they should be fulfilled — and not only ours
but those of the other NATO allies. Yet, at the same time, I was
conscious of the danger that the wrong signals might be given to leftwing opponents of strong defence at home and to our enemies abroad.
In early November 1980 I chaired a meeting of the Overseas and
Defence Committee of the Cabinet (OD) to consider a paper from Peter
Carrington and Francis Pym which argued that Britain should take the
initiative in proposing a wide-ranging review of NATO to make it
more relevant to western defence requirements and more cost
effective. In the longer term the members of the alliance should move
towards greater specialization. Attractive as the idea was from our
viewpoint, it quickly became clear that Chancellor Schmidt was
opposed to it, on the grounds that he believed that it would weaken
not strengthen NATO. Moreover, with the election of President
Reagan, committed to radically different policies from his predecessor,
my main emphasis came to be on keeping the alliance together, united
behind American leadership. However, whether matched by
international action or not, Britain was forced by pressures of
circumstance to conduct its own and — as it turned out — highly
controversial defence review.
I appointed John Nott to Defence in January 1981 with the remit of
getting better value for money from the huge sums spent on defence.
In February John, Peter Carrington and I had an initial discussion
about what would be our 1981 Defence Review. John had already
concluded that the defence budget was hopelessly overextended both
in the short and long term. The real cost of ever more sophisticated
weapons was remorselessly increasing the pressure. More sales of
defence equipment could help a little — particularly if we were able to
produce equipment more suited to the needs of potential overseas
customers. However, defence orders were running way ahead of
budget and would have to be cut back if we were to keep within any
kind of financial discipline. Some fundamental strategic issues also had
to be faced. There was very little scope for reducing our commitment
to West Germany. A policy of forward defence was crucial to the

alliance’s strategy: moreover the political implications of cuts here for
NATO as a whole could be very serious. Nor could savings be found in
home defence: indeed the effort here would have to be increased, for
example by strengthening the Territorial Army. There was no room for
savings on the RAF: on the contrary, additional expenditure would
probably be required. This left the navy. The navy needed more
submarines and more minesweepers. But it is extremely expensive to
keep up a large surface fleet and so that was plainly the area to look
for cuts. None of us had any illusions about the sensitivities involved
in the approach John proposed, but it was difficult to fault his
analysis.
In early May I had another discussion with John about the options
emerging clearly from his review. He believed that his proposals
would provide the basis for a far more effective defence force for the
needs of the future. But it was already clear that opposition within the
armed forces and in the Conservative Party would be strong. I would
have to see the Defence Chiefs of Staff to discuss with them their
reactions to what was proposed. Moreover, many marginal seats
would be involved, especially in dockyard closures. We would have to
make every effort to explain our priorities both in the country and to
our NATO allies, particularly the Americans.
What I had not expected was that the most public opposition would
come from a Defence minister. On Friday 15 May Keith Speed, the
Navy minister, made a speech which effectively disowned the whole
strategy of the review. John Nott did not want him to resign at once
and suggested that he should be moved to another department. I said
that there was no question of this: if he was going to be disloyal to the
Government in one department, he would in another. I saw him very
late on the night of Monday 18 May and told him he must go.
In early June I met the Chiefs of the Defence Staff, at their request,
with John and Peter Carrington. The press had been full of stories
about my ‘fury’ at their lobbying against the review. But in fact I had
found the behaviour of the Chiefs of Staff throughout impeccable, and
I said so. No one at the meeting openly contested that the NATO
central front was bound to be the decisive arena. Scenarios of conflict
in the Third World might be more likely: but only on the central front
could the war be lost in an afternoon. It was argued that we should
again press for a full-scale NATO review. But we could not afford to
postpone decisions in the hope that a NATO review might help us:
moreover such a review at this time could itself destabilize the
alliance.
On the morning of Monday 8 June John Nott and I met Sir Henry
Leach, the First Sea Lord, who argued vigorously the importance of the
surface fleet. I have the greatest respect for his judgement. He could
well argue that the Falklands War proved him right. He could certainly
argue today that with the end of the Cold War and events in the Gulf
there is now a need for mobile forces and a strong navy. At that time I

had to disagree with him because I could see no other way of meeting
our NATO obligations within the financial constraints.
John announced the conclusions of the Defence Review to the House
of Commons on the afternoon of Thursday 25 June. The decisions —
particularly to cut the number of ships and to close the base and
dockyard in Chatham — ran into fierce opposition, not least from
Members of Parliament whose constituencies were affected. The
closure of the dockyard went ahead. But after the Falklands campaign
the following year some of the decisions of the Defence Review were
altered. Certainly no one who lived through that campaign could be in
any doubt about the importance of a country such as Britain with farflung interests being able to project its military power swiftly and
effectively across the globe.
THE POLISH CRISIS
No matter how effectively Britain managed its defence effort it was on
the unity, strength and credibility of NATO that our security
ultimately depended. It was of the utmost importance that American
public opinion remained committed to western Europe. So the tensions
and divisions which arose in the alliance at this time were of great
concern to me. My view was that ultimately we must support
American leadership: but that did not mean that the Americans could
pursue their interests regardless of the opinion of their European
allies.
The need to decide how to react to the imposition of martial law by
General Jaruzelski’s Government in Poland on 13 December 1981
highlighted problems which had been growing throughout 1981. Some
European countries, most importantly the Germans, were hostile to
President Reagan’s economic policy and mistrustful of his rhetoric on
defence and arms control. I, of course, did not share these attitudes,
though I wanted tougher action to control the widening US budget
deficit. What I found irritating and on occasion quite unjustified was
the way in which the actions the Americans preferred inflicted a good
deal more pain on their allies than on themselves and, one might
argue, the communists in Poland and the Soviet Union. The first such
issue was the Polish Government’s crackdown on Solidarity.
I was from the first acutely aware of the importance of the Polish
question. Like most people in Britain, I have always liked and admired
the Poles, many of whom settled in this country during and after the
war. But there was more to it than that. On 9 December 1980 I talked
quite frankly to the Polish Deputy Prime Minister who visited London.
I said that I was conscious of witnessing a change in a socialist state of
a kind that had not occurred in the last sixty years. A new group of
people — the Solidarity movement — were challenging the
communists’ monopoly on power on their own terms. I told him how
closely we were watching events in Poland and how excited I was by

what was happening. I said that the socialist system had succeeded in
suppressing the human spirit for a surprisingly long time but that I had
always been confident that there would be a breakthrough.
But these happy signs were not to last. The Soviets brought
increasing pressure to bear on the Poles. From the end of 1980 the
Americans became convinced that the Soviet Union was planning
direct military intervention to crush the Polish reform movement, just
as they had crushed the ‘Prague Spring’ of 1968.
From about the same time we began to draw up measures to punish
the Soviet Union in such an eventuality. Peter Carrington and I agreed
that we should respond in a measured, graduated way depending on
the situation we faced. We foresaw four possibilities: a situation in
which the use of force by the Polish Government against Polish
workers was imminent, or had already taken place, or one in which
Soviet intervention was imminent, or had already taken place. We
agreed that ineffective sanctions would be worse than useless, but
sanctions would have to hit the Soviets harder than they hit us.
Meanwhile, we had to make a number of complex judgements about
Soviet and the Polish Government’s intentions. Was the present
ostentatious Warsaw Pact activity the prelude to armed intervention or
a means of bringing political pressure to bear on the Polish Communist
Party? If we continued to provide food aid and to proceed with plans
for Polish debt relief would this benefit the Polish people or play into
the hands of the hardliners in Poland who were struggling to survive
the consequences of their own misgovernment? These were not easy
judgements to make.
Suddenly the situation changed. Martial law was declared in Poland
from midnight on 12–13 December 1981 and a ‘Military Council for
National Salvation’ consisting of military leaders was set up under the
Prime Minister, General Jaruzelski. The borders were sealed, telex and
telephone links severed, a curfew imposed, strikes and assemblies
banned, the broadcasting system brought under tight control. There
was no doubt in my mind that all of this was morally unacceptable but
that did not make it easier to gauge the correct response. After all, in
order to warn off Soviet intervention, we had consistently said that the
Poles must be allowed to decide on their own internal affairs. Were
the Soviets themselves behind it, intending to use the crackdown as a
means of turning the clock back to hardline communism and
subordination to Moscow? Or was this really a temporary decision, as
the Jaruzelski Government claimed, forced upon them to bring some
kind of order to Poland, with the implication that this would prevent a
Soviet takeover? At this early stage there was a severe shortage of
information not just to illuminate these questions but even as to the
whereabouts and safety of leading Polish dissidents.
The more we learnt of the background to what had happened,
however, the worse it appeared. President Reagan was personally
outraged by what had occurred, believed that the Soviet Union was

behind it and was determined to take swift action. I received a
message from him on 19 December to this effect. Al Haig sent a
parallel message to Peter Carrington pointing out that the Americans
were not proposing that the West should now implement the farreaching measures to meet Soviet military intervention that had
already been agreed in NATO. What they wanted were some political
and economic measures at once and others in reserve if the situation
worsened. Without any further reference to us, the Americans would
be announcing sanctions against the Soviet Union later that day.
These, we were were glad to note, rightly did not include
abandonment of the disarmament talks going on in Geneva. But they
did include measures such as the cancellation of Aeroflot landing
rights, a halt to negotiations on a new long-term grain agreement
(though an existing agreement would remain in place) and a halt to
the export of material for the construction of the planned natural gas
pipelines on which work had already begun.
It was this last point which was to be the cause of great anger in
Britain and other European countries. British, German and Italian
firms had legally binding contracts to provide equipment for the West
Siberian Gas Pipeline, which involved components made in the United
States or under United States licence. It was not clear at this stage
whether the measures announced by President Reagan against the
Soviet Union applied to existing contracts as well as new ones. If the
ban extended to existing contracts this would deprive British firms of
over £200 million of business with the Soviet Union. Worst affected
would be a contract of John Brown Engineering for pump equipment
for the pipeline project on which large numbers of jobs depended.
While pressing the Americans on this particular point, I ensured that
we gave them the strongest possible backing both in NATO and the
European Community for the general line they wanted to take. This
was by no means easy. Initially, the Germans were reluctant to take
any measures against the Polish Government, let alone against the
Soviet Union. The French were pressing hard for continuing the sale of
food at special subsidized prices by the European Community to the
Soviet Union. But I still felt that if we could persuade the Americans to
take a more reasonable line over the pipeline project we would be able
to demonstrate a fairly impressive western unity. The trouble was that
there were those in the American Administration whose opposition to
the pipeline project had nothing much to do with events in Poland.
These people believed that if it went ahead the Germans and the
French would be dangerously dependent on Soviet energy supplies,
which would have damaging strategic implications. There was some
force in this argument; but it was exaggerated. Although Russia would
be providing just over a quarter of Germany’s and just under a third of
France’s gas, this would be no more than 5 per cent of either country’s
total energy consumption. But in any case neither the Germans nor the
French were going to accede to American pressure. Such pressure

would therefore be counter-productive as well as irrelevant to the
specific problem we faced in Poland. There was also American talk,
which seriously worried the Bank of England, of forcing Poland to
default on her international debts, which would have had severe
effects on European banks.
At OD towards the end of January 1982 we discussed these
possibilities. I said that there was a clear danger of the American
Government’s present policy damaging western interests more than
those of the East and provoking a major transatlantic quarrel of
precisely the sort that it had long been the main objective of Soviet
policy to bring about. Britain had already offered to do more to meet
American wishes than our European partners were likely to accept.
This was no longer a time for concessions but for some straight talking
to our American friends. I decided to approach President Reagan. I
also asked other ministers to try to influence their American
counterparts. An urgent invitation would be extended to Al Haig to
visit London on the way back from his current visit to the Middle East.
In fact, Al Haig joined me for a late lunch at Downing Street on
Friday 29 January. I told him that the single most important aim must
be to keep the western alliance together. The most recent meeting of
the NATO Council had gone well. But the measures now being
proposed by the United States were causing concern. Anything that the
West did must be designed to harm the Soviet Union more than
ourselves. The reports of possible steps by the US to bring about a
default on Polish debts and indeed the debts of other East European
countries were worrying: although this would doubtless bring about
difficulties for the countries concerned it would also create
incalculable problems for the western banking system, which was so
important to the reputation of the western world as a whole. I also
said that whatever the Americans felt about the matter we had to face
the fact that the French and the Germans were never going to abandon
their contracts for the Siberian Gas Pipeline. Nearer the bone, I noted
that the Americans had not included a grain embargo in their first
round of measures because this would clearly hurt their own people.
Indeed, few of the measures adopted by the United States would have
any serious effect at home — but they would hurt Europe. To say the
least there was a certain lack of symmetry.
I gained the strong impression that Mr Haig basically agreed with
my analysis. I also had the sense that he was feeling increasingly
isolated and powerless in the American Administration, which indeed
he was to leave later in the year. He said that he thought that it would
be useful if I sent a message to President Reagan about these matters,
which I did later that day. I believe that the pressure I applied had
some effect, but unfortunately it proved to be temporary.
Meanwhile, the West’s response to events in Poland was becoming
increasingly entangled with the wider question of our political and
economic stance towards the Soviet Union. President Reagan sent a

message to me on 8 March stressing the need to halt or at least restrict
the grant of export credit to the Soviet Union, particularly credit
subsidized by our Governments. The American argument was that not
only was the USSR economically weak, it was suffering from an acute
shortage of foreign exchange. European and other governments which
provided the Soviet Union with subsidized credit were cushioning
their failing system from economic realities which would otherwise
have forced its reform. The Administration had a good argument here,
though our assessment was that restricting credit would not have the
dramatic impact which some US experts imagined. At this time we
were receiving conflicting and confusing signals from the US
Administration about its intentions. But I hoped that tighter controls
by European governments on credit for the Soviet Union might allow
us to secure the undertaking we wanted that the US restrictions on
contracts for the Siberian Pipeline would not be retrospective.
Out of the blue, however, the Americans announced on 18 June that
the ban on the supply of oil and gas technology to the Soviet Union
was to apply not only to US companies but also to their foreign
subsidiaries and to foreign companies manufacturing Americandesigned components under licence. I was appalled when I learnt of
this decision. I condemned it in public. The reaction of the Europeans
generally was still more hostile.
Britain took legislative action under the Protection of Trading
Interests Act to resist what was in effect the extension of US extraterritorial authority. Then European irritation was increased still
further by the news that the Americans were intending to renew grain
sales to the USSR on the pretext that this would drain the USSR of
hard currency — but transparently because it was in the interests of
American farmers to sell their grain. The Administration was
somewhat taken aback by the strength of opposition they faced and it
was left to the excellent new Secretary of State, George Shultz, to find
a way out of the difficulties, which he did later in the year, allowing
the existing contracts for the pipeline to go ahead. But it had all been
a lesson in how not to conduct alliance business.
THE VERSAILLES G7 SUMMIT
I like to think that my own relationship with President Reagan and the
efforts I made to try to establish common ground between the United
States and the Europeans helped to prevent disagreements over the
pipeline and other trading issues from poisoning western co-operation
at this critical juncture. Certainly, the summer of 1982 saw some
useful international diplomacy. Between 4 and 6 June the heads of
government of the G7 countries met amid the splendid opulence of
Versailles. The rooms of the Palace itself were used for meetings and
relaxation. There was a final banquet in the Hall of Mirrors followed
by after-dinner entertainment of opera and fireworks. (In fact, I left

early: it would not have been right to stay for all this while our troops
were still fighting in the Falklands.)
President Mitterrand, who chaired the summit, had prepared a
paper on the impact of new technology on employment. It quite often
happened that the country in the chair at summit meetings felt that
they must introduce some new initiatives even at the cost of extra
government intervention and increased bureaucracy. This was no
exception. For my part, I had no doubt about the attitude to take to
technological innovation: it must be welcomed not resisted. There
might be ‘new’ technology but technological progress itself was
nothing new, and over the years it had not destroyed jobs but created
them. Our task was not to make grand plans for technological
innovation but rather to see how public opinion could be influenced in
order to embrace not recoil from it. Fortunately, therefore, President
Mitterrand’s paper was kicked into touch in the form of a working
group.
I had a candid bilateral discussion with Helmut Schmidt while I was
at Versailles about the European Community budget — to which West
Germany and Britain seemed destined to remain net contributors —
and about the CAP on which so much of our money was spent. This
was a particularly sore point for me, because only a few weeks before
Britain had been overridden in the Agriculture Council when we had
sought to invoke the Luxemburg compromise against farm price rises.
Helmut Schmidt said that he wanted to maintain the Luxemburg
compromise, though he doubted whether it should be applied as we
wished. But he added that the CAP was a price which had to be paid,
however high, to persuade members like France and Italy to come into
the Community from the beginning.
As it happened, this was Chancellor Schmidt’s last G7 summit. In
September his governing coalition broke up when the liberal Free
Democrats changed sides and put the Christian Democrat Leader,
Helmut Kohl, in as Chancellor. Although I had had serious
disagreements with him, I always had the highest regard for Helmut
Schmidt’s wisdom, straightforwardness and grasp of international
economics. Sadly, I never developed quite the same relationship with
Chancellor Kohl, though it was some time before the implications of
this became important.
But my most vivid recollection of the proceedings at Versailles is of
the impression made by President Reagan. At one point he spoke for
twenty minutes or so without notes, outlining his economic vision. His
quiet but powerful words provided those who did not yet know him
with some insight into the qualities which made him such a
remarkable political leader. After he had finished, President
Mitterrand acknowledged that no one would criticize President Reagan
for being true to his beliefs. Given President Mitterrand’s socialist
policies, that was almost a compliment.

From Paris President Reagan flew to London for an official visit
where he addressed both Houses of Parliament in the Royal Gallery of
the Palace of Westminster. The speech itself was a remarkable one. It
marked a decisive stage in the battle of ideas which he and I wished to
wage against socialism, above all the socialism of the Soviet Union.
Both of us were convinced that strong defence was a necessary, but
not sufficient, means of overcoming the communist threat. Instead of
seeking merely to contain communism, which had been the West’s
doctrine in the past, we wished to put freedom on the offensive. In his
speech President Reagan proposed a worldwide campaign for
democracy to support ‘the democratic revolution [which was]
gathering new strength’. In retrospect, however, that speech had a
larger significance. It marked a new direction in the West’s battle
against communism. It was the manifesto of the Reagan doctrine —
the very obverse of the Brezhnev doctrine — under which the West
would not abandon those countries which had had communism forced
upon them.
I remember the speech for another reason as well. I was full of
admiration that he seemed to have delivered it without a single note.
‘I congratulate you on your actor’s memory,’ I said.
He replied, ‘I read the whole speech from those two perspex screens’
— referring to what we had taken to be some security device. ‘Don’t
you know it? It’s a British invention.’ And so it was that I made my
first acquaintance with Autocue.
THE BONN NATO SUMMIT, JUNE 1982
The NATO summit of heads of government in Bonn on 10 June was
generally linked to the Versailles summit. At Versailles the G7 had
demonstrated that with one or two exceptions, such as France, the
major countries were committed to a return to sound economic
policies. At Bonn the West was similarly able to demonstrate its
commitment to strong defence.
Of course, all of us wanted both strong defence and successful
negotiations with the Soviet Union to reduce the level of armaments.
But there was a real question about which should come first. There
continued to be a muted but important argument about the ‘dual
track’ policy. Some countries hoped to be able to delay virtually
indefinitely the implementation of the decision to deploy Cruise and
Pershing missiles. For example, in the dying days of the Schmidt
Government there were strong voices in Germany arguing that
deployment would jeopardize the prospect of successful negotiations.
By contrast, the Americans and we in Britain felt that a strong defence
posture is an absolute prerequisite for any constructive relationship
with the USSR and therefore deterrence is the condition for détente.
Indeed, the original idea for the Bonn summit had come from us in

Britain because we believed that it was vital to demonstrate the unity
of purpose of NATO at this time. The result more or less fulfilled that
intention.
But there continued to be Soviet pressure, supported by
demonstrations by the so-called ‘peace movement’ and encouraged by
the appeasement of the left-wing politicians in Europe right up to the
moment when Cruise and Pershing were deployed. We were never
able to rest our argument or relax our efforts.
HONG KONG AND CHINA
By the time I visited the Far East in September 1982 Britain’s standing
in the world, and my own, had been transformed as a result of victory
in the Falklands. But one issue on which this was, if anything, a
drawback was in talking to the Chinese over Hong Kong. The Chinese
leaders were out to demonstrate that the Falklands was no precedent
for dealing with the Colony. I was well aware of that myself, both
from the military and the legal viewpoints.
On the morning of Wednesday 22 September I and my party took off
from Tokyo, where I had been visiting, for Peking. Fifteen years
remained of the lease to Britain of the New Territories which
constitute over 90 per cent of the land of the Colony of Hong Kong.
The island of Hong Kong itself is British sovereign territory, but, like
the rest of the Colony, dependent on the mainland for water and other
supplies. The People’s Republic of China refused to recognize the
Treaty of Nanking, signed in 1842, by which the island of Hong Kong
had been acquired by Britain. Consequently, although my negotiating
stance was founded on Britain’s sovereign claim to at least part of the
territory of Hong Kong, I knew that I could not ultimately rely on this
as a means of ensuring the future prosperity and security of the
Colony. Our negotiating aim was to exchange sovereignty over the
island of Hong Kong in return for continued British administration of
the entire Colony well into the future. This I knew from my many
consultations with politicians and business leaders of Hong Kong was
the solution which would suit them best.
The immediate danger, which had already been illustrated by
reaction in Hong Kong to the provisions of our Nationality Bill and to
various remarks by the Chinese communists, was that financial
confidence would evaporate and that money and in due course key
personnel would flee the Colony, impoverishing and destabilizing it
well before the lease of the New Territories came to an end. Moreover,
it was necessary to act now if new investment was to be made, since
investors would be looking some fifteen years or so ahead in judging
what decisions to make.
I had visited Peking in April 1977 as Leader of the Opposition. The
‘Gang of Four’ had been deposed a few months before and Hua Guo

Feng was Chairman. Deng Xiaoping, who had suffered so much during
the Cultural Revolution, had been ousted by the ‘Gang of Four’ the
previous year and was still in detention. But on the occasion of this,
my first visit as Prime Minister — indeed the first visit of any British
prime minister while still in office — Deng Xiaoping was indisputably
in charge.
On the afternoon of Wednesday 22 September I had my first
meeting which was with the Chinese Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang —
whose moderation and reasonableness proved to be a great handicap
to him in his subsequent career. We had a discussion of the world
scene in which, because of the Chinese hostility to Soviet hegemony,
we found much to agree about. However, the Chinese Prime Minister
and I were aware that the following morning’s meeting we were to
have on Hong Kong would be a very different matter.
I began that meeting with a prepared statement setting out the
British position. I said that Hong Kong was a unique example of
successful Sino-British co-operation. I noted that the two main
elements of the Chinese view concerned sovereignty and the continued
prosperity of Hong Kong. Prosperity depended on confidence. If drastic
changes in the administrative control of Hong Kong were to be
introduced or even announced now there would certainly be a
wholesale flight of capital. This was not something which Britain
would prompt — far from it. But nor was it something we could
prevent. A collapse of Hong Kong would be to the discredit of both our
countries. Confidence and prosperity depended on British
administration. If our two Governments could agree on arrangements
for the future administration of Hong Kong; if those arrangements
would work and command confidence among the people of the
Colony; and if they satisfied the British Parliament — we would then
consider the question of sovereignty.
I had hoped that this practical and realistic line of argument would
prove persuasive. After all, China gained large amounts of foreign
currency and investment by having a capitalist Hong Kong on her
doorstep. Even at the height of the Cultural Revolution, though riots
had been fomented in the Colony by the communists, the Red Guards
had never been permitted to launch a full-scale attack on Hong Kong. I
tried to persuade Mr Zhao that we should agree a fairly noncommittal
joint public statement saying that our common objective was to
maintain the prosperity of Hong Kong and that there would be early
official talks between us about this.
However, it was quite clear from the Chinese Prime Minister’s
opening remarks that they would not compromise on sovereignty and
that they intended to recover their sovereignty over the whole of Hong
Kong — the island as well as the New Territories — in 1997 and no
later. The fundamental position underlying the Chinese position was
that the people of Hong Kong were Chinese and not British. That said,
Hong Kong could become a special administrative zone administered

by local people with its existing economic and social system
unchanged. The capitalist system in Hong Kong would remain, as
would its free port and its function as an international financial centre.
The Hong Kong dollar would continue to be used and to be
convertible. In answer to my vigorous intervention about the loss of
confidence which such a position, if announced, would bring, he said
that if it came to a choice between sovereignty on the one hand and
prosperity and stability on the other China would put sovereignty first.
The meeting was courteous enough. But the Chinese refused to budge
an inch.
I knew that the substance of what had been said would be conveyed
to Deng Xiaoping whom I met the next day. Mr Deng was known as a
realist. Indeed, it was he who effectively unlocked the way to a
solution in Hong Kong. He had accepted that two different economic
systems could exist in one country, a fact demonstrated by the setting
up of special economic zones behind Hong Kong, within China itself.
On this occasion, however, he was obdurate. He reiterated that the
Chinese were not prepared to discuss sovereignty. He said that the
decision that Hong Kong would return to Chinese sovereignty need not
be announced now, but that in one or two years’ time the Chinese
Government would formally announce their decision to recover it. I
repeated that what I wanted was agreement in further talks that after
1997 British administration would continue with the same system of
law, the same political system, and the same independent currency. If
we could at a later stage reach such an agreement there would be a
tremendous upsurge in confidence. I could then go to the British
Parliament and have the whole question of sovereignty dealt with to
China’s satisfaction.
But he was not to be persuaded. At one point he said that the
Chinese could walk in and take Hong Kong later today if they wanted
to. I retorted that they could indeed do so, I could not stop them. But
this would bring about Hong Kong’s collapse. The world would then
see what followed a change from British to Chinese rule.
For the first time he seemed taken aback: his mood became more
accommodating. But he had still not grasped the essential point, going
on to insist that the British should stop money leaving Hong Kong. I
tried to explain that as soon as you stop money going out you
effectively end the prospect of new money coming in. Investors lose all
confidence and that would be the end of Hong Kong. It was becoming
very clear to me that the Chinese had little understanding of the legal
and political conditions for capitalism. They would need to be
educated slowly and thoroughly in how it worked if they were to keep
Hong Kong prosperous and stable. I also felt throughout these
discussions that the Chinese, believing their own slogans about the
evils of colonialism, just did not realize that we in Britain considered
we had a moral duty to do our best to protect the free way of life of
the people of Hong Kong.

For all the difficulties, however, the talks were not the damaging
failure which they might have been. Although I failed to achieve my
initial objective, I managed to get Deng Xiaoping to agree to a short
statement which, while not pretending that we had reached
agreement, announced the beginning of talks with the common aim of
maintaining the stability and prosperity of Hong Kong. It was essential
that something of the sort be said to bolster the fragile confidence
back in Hong Kong. Neither the people of the colony nor I had secured
all that we wanted, but I felt that we had at least laid the basis for
reasonable negotiations. We each knew where the other stood.
The visit had been a full and tiring one. It was not all business,
however, and there was time for a little sightseeing. While I was in
China I had been able to visit the extraordinarily beautiful Summer
Palace on the north-western outskirts of Peking, known in Chinese as
the Garden of Peaceful Easy Life. I felt that this was a less than
accurate description of my own visit to the Far East.
THE BERLIN WALL
The following month I visited another monument which, unlike the
Summer Palace, has now crumbled into rubble and dust. After talks
with Chancellor Helmut Kohl in Bonn, I flew to Berlin and gained my
first sight of the Berlin Wall and of the grey, bleak and devastated land
beyond it in which dogs prowled under the gaze of armed Russian
guards. Chancellor Kohl accompanied me on this visit and, whatever
difficulties would arise in the future, on matters like the evils of
communism and commitment to our American allies we were as one. I
suspect that the German press understood, as their comments later
suggested, how powerfully moved I was by Berlin. The city was
vibrant and exciting, larger than I had thought, surrounded by
beautiful woods — yet uniquely scarred by the two totalitarian creeds
of the twentieth century.
In my speech that afternoon — Friday 29 October — I said:
There are forces more powerful and pervasive than the apparatus of war.
You may chain a man — but you cannot chain his mind. You may enslave
him — but you will not conquer his spirit. In every decade since the war the
Soviet leaders have been reminded that their pitiless ideology only survives
because it is maintained by force. But the day comes when the anger and
frustration of the people is so great that force cannot contain it. Then the
edifice cracks: the mortar crumbles … one day, liberty will dawn on the
other side of the wall.

My prophesy has been vindicated earlier than I could ever have
expected.
*

By the end of the decade 25–30 per cent of GNP was commonly estimated.

Germany had forsworn nuclear, chemical and biological weapons when it joined
NATO in 1955.
*

CHAPTER X

Disarming the Left
Winning the arguments and formulating the policies for a second term
— 1982–1983

THE POLITICAL SCENE, 1982–1983
It is no exaggeration to say that the outcome of the Falklands War
transformed the British political scene. In fact, the Conservative Party
had begun to recover its position in the opinion polls before the
conflict, as people began to realize that economic recovery was
underway. But the so-called ‘Falklands factor’, beloved of political
commentators and psephologists, was real enough. I could feel the
impact of the victory wherever I went. It is often said that elections
are won and lost on the issue of the economy, and though there is
some truth in this, it is plainly an oversimplification. In this case,
without any prompting from us, people saw the connection between
the resolution we had shown in economic policy and that
demonstrated in the handling of the Falklands crisis. Reversing our
economic decline was one part of the task of restoring Britain’s
reputation; demonstrating that we were not the sort of people to bow
before dictators was another. As I emerged from the strain of the
period in which the Falklands dominated almost every moment, I
found that people were starting to appreciate what had been achieved
during the last three years. I drew attention in my speeches to the
record and to the fact that none of it would have happened if we had
followed the policies pressed upon us by the Opposition.
The Opposition itself was divided between Labour and the new
‘Alliance’ of the Liberal and Social Democratic parties. Though we
were not to know it at the time, Alliance support had peaked and it
would never be able to recapture the heady atmosphere of late 1981
when it had led in the opinion polls and its supporters had claimed
they had truly ‘broken the mould’ of British two-party politics. In fact,
of course, the one thing you never get from parties which deliberately
seek the middle way between left and right is new ideas and radical
initiatives. We were the mould-breakers, they the mould. The SDP and
Liberals hankered after all the failed policies of the past — incomes
policies, reflation by fiscal boosts to demand, shifting more power to a
European bureaucracy and away from genuinely democratic national
governments. The SDP’s instincts on defence were sound — as opposed
to the Liberals, perpetually tempted by unilateralism — and they were
contemptuous of Marxist dogma. But I always felt — and still do —
that the leaders of the SDP would have done better to stay in the

Labour Party and drive out the far Left. The risk was that by
abandoning the Labour Party to its militant wing, while attracting
support away from us, they might actually let into power the very
people they were seeking to keep out.
As for Labour, the Party continued an apparently inexorable
leftward shift. Michael Foot is a highly principled and cultivated man,
invariably courteous in our dealings. If I did not think it would offend
him, I would say he was a gentleman. In debate and on the platform
he has a kind of genius. But the policies he espoused, including
unilateral disarmament, withdrawal from the European Community,
sweeping nationalization of industry and much greater powers for
trade unions, were not only catastrophically unsuitable for Britain:
they also constituted an umbrella beneath which sinister
revolutionaries, intent on destroying the institutions of the state and
the values of society, were able to shelter. The more the general public
learned of Labour’s policies and personnel the less they liked them. I
was not among those many Conservatives at the time who thought
that Labour would be displaced by the Alliance. Socialism represents
an enduring temptation: no one should underestimate Labour’s
potential appeal. But there was no doubt that in the extreme form
adopted under Michael Foot’s leadership it was easier to beat.
The opinion polls and by-election results confirmed what my own
instincts told me — that the Falklands had strengthened our standing
in the country. On the eve of the war we had already moved just
ahead of the Alliance parties in the polls. Between April and May our
support rose ten percentage points to 41.5 per cent, well ahead of all
the other parties. It rose again in the wake of the recapture of the
islands and then fell back a little during the second half of the year.
However, on only one occasion between then and the election did it
dip below 40 per cent. I never took much notice of what the polls said
about me personally. Too much concentration on this sort of thing can
be a distraction. But it was also true that my own standing in the polls
had gone up substantially.
The ‘Falklands factor’ certainly punctured the Alliance: together
with mounting optimism about the economic prospect, it helped us
win back those Conservative supporters who had defected to what
seemed a more comfortable, moderate option. Nor was there any joy
in the polls for poor Michael Foot, whether one looked at Labour
support as a whole, or his personal standing as leader.
However, by-election results in the last part of the Parliament
confirmed that in some constituencies there was a real danger of the
Alliance splitting the centre-right vote and letting Labour in. A good
Alliance result always risked setting off the bandwaggon which its
friends in the media longed to see rolling. In March 1982 Roy Jenkins
had won a stunning victory over us in Glasgow Hillhead. Only two
months later we held our vote — and the seat — in Beaconsfield and
in June we actually gained Mitcham and Morden from a defector to

the SDP. Yet on 28 October there were by-elections in Peckham and
Birmingham (Northfield) in both of which the Conservative vote was
badly squeezed by the Alliance. As a result, we lost the Birmingham
seat to Labour. The risks were evident, though looking at the figures in
detail, the news was not all good for Labour: we knew that they would
have to do a great deal better to stand any chance of winning a
general election.
The last two by-elections of the Parliament were at Bermondsey in
February 1983, where a far-left Labour candidate was routed by the
Liberals, and Darlington in March which was held by Labour. We did
not do well, but neither of these by-elections really harmed us. Labour
was the main competitor in London, so Bermondsey was not likely to
do us much damage. And although Labour won at Darlington, they did
not do well enough to threaten our position nationally. The
commentators loved to speculate, but no one knew how much tactical
voting there would be against us in a general election — that is, how
many people would vote for the candidates who seemed best placed to
beat those standing for the Government, rather than for their preferred
party. In fact, this sort of behaviour occurs much more rarely than
predicted.
I always took a close interest in by-elections. I was regularly briefed
by the Party Chairman about the issues and tactics, and I also received
a detailed statistical breakdown from Keith Britto, our resident
psephological genius at Central Office, on swings and their
implications. I myself never took part in by-election campaigns in case
I caused the Government to run unacceptable political risks in the
event of a bad result: and results usually are bad when you are in
power, especially in mid-term when many people wish to register a
protest, safe in the knowledge that the result will not bring about a
change of government. But I always sent public messages of support to
our candidates and spoke privately to them afterwards to congratulate
or — more usually — to console.
DEFENCE AND UNILATERALISM
Inevitably, defence was the political issue on which the Falklands War
had the greatest bearing. During the Falklands campaign itself the
nuclear issue was almost entirely edged out of public debate, though
my speech at the UN Special Session on disarmament in June 1982
was an attempt to show how the same fundamental principles
underlay the whole of defence policy.* However, in the autumn of that
year, I began to be more concerned about the presentation of our
nuclear strategy. I was anxious that the unilateral disarmers were still
making the running on nuclear issues. Although public opinion was
with us on the principle of the nuclear deterrent and opposed to
unilateralism, there was a good deal of opposition to Trident II, mainly
on grounds of cost, and to the stationing of Cruise missiles. Underlying

both was a disagreeable streak of anti-Americanism. Accordingly, on
20 October and 24 November I chaired meetings of the Liaison
Committee of Ministers and Central Office officials to explore the facts
and refine the arguments.
Unilateralism became the official policy of the Labour Party at the
1982 Party Conference, when the necessary two-thirds majority was
secured. Michael Foot personally had long been committed to the
unilateralist position. It had an appeal in the universities and among
some intellectuals and received a good deal of covert support from
those in the media, especially the BBC. Labour councils had adopted
the gimmick of declaring their areas ‘nuclear free zones’. Although the
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) had begun to lose support
from the high point it had reached in 1981, it remained dangerously
strong.
Of the two specific aspects of nuclear policy at the centre of debate
— the independent deterrent and the stationing of medium-range
nuclear missiles — it was the second which was the more
controversial. Cruise missiles would have to be deployed sometime in
1983 and we could expect a major campaign to prevent this.
Ultimate control of Cruise missiles was the most tricky issue. The
decision to modernize medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe, it will
be recalled, had been made under pressure from the Europeans,
particularly the Germans, anxious to prevent any ‘decoupling’ of the
American and European wings of NATO. The Americans had
developed and paid for the missiles, and therefore owned them,
massively reducing the cost to European governments. There was a
strong feeling in the US Congress that any US-owned missiles should
be subject to US control. However, American ownership obviously
carried implications if it ever came to decisions about use.
In Britain, distrust of the United States surfaced on the question of
whether there should be a ‘dual key’ — that is whether there should
be a technical arrangement to ensure that the US could not fire these
weapons without the consent of the British Government. That would
go beyond the existing agreement that the US would not use nuclear
weapons based in Britain without an Anglo-American ‘joint decision’.
The United States had offered us the possibility of dual key right at
the start, but to exercise that option we would have had to buy the
weapons ourselves, which would have been hugely expensive. John
Nott, before he left his post as Defence Secretary, had been attracted
by the dual key option. But neither Michael Heseltine, his successor,
nor I shared his view. The UK had never exercised physical control
over systems owned and manned by the US. It was in my view neither
fair nor necessary to ask the US to break with that precedent now.
Also the more the Soviets were told about how and in what conditions
Cruise missiles would be fired, the less credible they would be as a
deterrent. The Soviets might be persuaded — and for the purposes of
deterrence it did not matter whether they were right or wrong — that

at the last moment a British Government might not agree to their use.
Finally, the use of a dual key in the United Kingdom would have
raised the whole question of arrangements elsewhere in Europe. In
West Germany both government and public opinion would, as I have
noted, only agree to deploying Cruise and Pershing II missiles if there
was no German finger on the trigger.
So for all these reasons I satisfied myself through discussions with
Washington that the position in reality was satisfactory from the point
of view of British security and defence, and on 1 May 1983 I cleared
personally with President Reagan the precise formula we should use to
describe it. But I knew that it would be difficult to defend our line: not
only anti-nuclear protesters but a sizeable number of our own
supporters in and out of Parliament had their doubts. Moreover, most
of the newspapers were opposed to us on the question of dual key.
The timing of deployment was bound to be a sensitive matter,
especially with an election campaign ahead. We were anxious to avoid
very visible signs of deployment in the run-up to or during the 1983
general election campaign, with demonstrations stretching police
resources. Until almost the last moment we had been planning an
autumn election. But as events happened we had an election in June,
so this was not the problem which it might have been. (The launchers
and warheads duly arrived in November.)
Elsewhere in Europe the situation was still more difficult. There was
already a good deal of public criticism in Germany and Italy of NATO’s
offer of the zero-option, which was widely felt to be unrealistic. And
the Soviets were mounting a major public relations campaign.
It was crucial that NATO’s policy on arms control be well presented
and that the alliance should stick together. On Wednesday 9 February
I had a meeting at Downing Street with George Bush to discuss these
matters. The Vice-President had a special remit from President Reagan
to keep in touch with European governments and he did this with
great skill. He was always very well briefed and had a friendly,
straightforward manner, the proof that this reflected personality rather
than artifice being that his staff were well known to be devoted to
him. I now urged the Vice-President that the American Administration
should take a new initiative in the INF negotiations. The aim should be
to seek an interim agreement whereby limited reductions on the Soviet
side would be balanced by reduced deployments on the part of the
United States, without abandoning the zero-option as our ultimate
goal — that is the complete elimination of intermediate-range nuclear
weapons.
Mr Bush reported my views back to President Reagan who replied in
a message to me on Wednesday 16 February. The President was at this
stage somewhat noncommittal about a new initiative but said that he
would be willing to consider seriously any reasonable alternative idea
for producing the same result as the zero-option. This did not seem to
me to be sufficient. I replied two days later on the hot-line. I stressed

the success of Vice-President Bush’s visit to Europe, but pointed out
that one of its effects had been to raise expectations. I hoped that the
speech which President Reagan was due to make shortly on these
matters would go beyond a restatement of the US position and begin
to indicate how it might be developed. As things turned out, the
President’s statement contained nothing new. So I continued the
private pressure for further movement, while remaining in public
totally supportive of the American position.
Then on Monday 14 March President Reagan sent me another
message. He said that he had directed that a prompt review of the US
position on INF negotiations should be made as a basis for new
instructions to the US arms negotiating team. In the meantime, he
asked that there should be no European calls for US flexibility and
specifically asked me to express confidence in the very close
coordination of our policies. I replied warmly welcoming his decision.
On Wednesday 23 March the President told me the results of his
review. While sticking to the ultimate objective of the zero-option, the
chief US negotiator, Paul Nitze, would tell the Soviets at Geneva
before the end of the current round of negotiations that the US was
indeed prepared to negotiate an interim agreement. The Americans
would stop deployment of a (still to be specified) number of warheads,
on condition that the USSR reduced the number of warheads on its
mobile long-range INF missiles to one equal with the US on a global
basis. The President said that it was his tentative judgement that they
should not offer specific numbers at this time. Again, I welcomed his
decision, but argued that he should consider giving specific figures. In
fact the President’s proposal announced on 30 March did not do so.
But his modest flexibility did have a beneficial effect on public opinion
and incidentally helped us in Britain fighting the general election
campaign soon be upon us.
ECONOMIC RECOVERY
In that election campaign, defence would be of great political
importance. Yet I had no doubt that the result would ultimately
depend on the economy. Our economic course had already been set in
the 1981 budget. We now had to see the strategy through. It was a
remarkable testament to the soundness of public finances by this stage
that we managed to pay for the Falklands War out of the Contingency
Reserve without a penny of extra taxation and with barely a tremor in
the financial markets. The economy was already beginning to recover
and would have done so more rapidly but for sluggish world
conditions. Geoffrey Howe’s 1982 budget was designed to encourage
that recovery by helping business, while keeping inflation and interest
rates coming down by reducing government borrowing. The principal
measure of direct assistance to industry in the 1982 budget was a
reduction in the National Insurance Surcharge. We were able to make

further reductions at the time of the 1982 Autumn Statement and
again in the 1983 budget. These made a direct contribution to cutting
industry’s wage-related costs and helped to increase employment.
Another means of strengthening industry without becoming
involved in the futile task of ‘picking winners’ was to promote the
application of the new ‘information technology’ (IT). This was
something in which I took a particularly close interest. As a scientist, I
was fascinated by the technology itself; as a passionate advocate of
free enterprise capitalism I was convinced that, given the right
framework of laws and an appropriately educated workforce, it could
widen choice, generate wealth and jobs and improve the quality of
people’s lives. Both Keith Joseph at Education and Ken Baker at
Industry felt as I did. We designated 1982 Information Technology
Year and we all made special efforts to widen understanding of what
IT could do for business. Of course, it was the young people who found
it easiest to learn the new skills and one of our most valuable and
appreciated initiatives was to put a desk-top computer in every
secondary school.
By now the question we were being asked was not whether
economic recovery would come but rather how fast and how
sustainable it would be, and also when unemployment would begin to
fall. Since the whole basis of our approach to economic policy was that
politicians and civil servants do not know all the answers, I never felt
tempted to pick figures out of the air. But I did my best to encourage
confidence because as long as the fundamentals — the public finances,
monetary policy, tax levels and so on — are sound, confidence itself
leads to higher investment and higher consumer spending and so helps
recovery. For example, on Tuesday 19 April 1983 I addressed the CBI
annual dinner at the London Hilton. We were only weeks away from
the election, though neither the audience — nor even the guest
speaker — knew it. I reminded them that when I had last been their
guest two years earlier there was plenty to worry about in the state of
the economy:
Indeed, we had just read an open letter which predicted doom and gloom
indefinitely unless we changed our policies. It was signed by no fewer than
364 economists — enough … to provide me with bad advice for every day of
the year except All Fools’ Day.

Since then, however, cuts in the NIS had put £2 billion a year back
into the hands of private companies. Personal tax had also been cut by
raising thresholds faster than inflation. Interest rates were seven
percentage points below their peak, saving industry about another £2
billion. The exchange rate had fallen from a high point of $2.45 in
October 1980 to $1.54 now. This was providing a boost for exporters.
Industrial output, housing starts, and car sales were all up. There was
plenty of evidence of recovery — above all, one that was soundly
based.

The money supply and government borrowing had been brought
under control. Public spending was at last expected to begin falling as
a share of GDP, if only slightly, now that the economy was growing
again. Our overseas debts had been virtually halved. Productivity in
industry was greatly improved. Most dramatically, inflation had fallen
from 20 to 4 per cent — its lowest level for 13 years. Success against
inflation was the single achievement to which we drew most attention
as we approached the election, not least because Labour looked set to
promise huge increases in spending and borrowing which could never
be honestly financed and which would have sent prices soaring again.
The black spot in the record was, of course, unemployment, which was
still well over three million. It would be vital in the campaign to
explain why this was so and what we were doing about it. Our ability
to deal with this issue successfully would be a test not only of our
eloquence and credibility but also of the maturity and understanding
of the British electorate.
TRADE UNIONS
Unlike some of my colleagues, I never ceased to believe that, other
things being equal, the level of unemployment was related to the
extent of trade union power. The unions had priced many of their
members out of jobs by demanding excessive wages for insufficient
output, so making British goods uncompetitive. So both Norman
Tebbit, my new Secretary of State for Employment, and I were
impatient to press ahead with further reforms in trade union law,
which we knew to be necessary and popular, not least among trade
unionists.
Norman wasted no time. Towards the end of October 1981 he
sought Cabinet agreement for what was to become the Employment
Act, 1982. There were to be six main areas covered.
We would raise substantially the levels of compensation for those
unfairly dismissed in a closed shop.
In existing closed shops there would be periodic ballots to test
support among employees for their continuation.
We would make unlawful what were called ‘union labour only’
requirements in contracts, which discriminated against companies not
operating a closed shop.
Henceforth, employers would be able to dismiss those taking part in
a strike or other industrial action without having to run the risk of
claims for unfair dismissal, provided that all of those taking part in the
strike were dismissed.
The definition of a lawful trade dispute was to be further restricted
in a number of ways, closing loopholes in Jim Prior’s legislation to
limit immunities in case of secondary action.

By far the most important of Norman’s proposals related to the
immunity currently extended to trade union funds. By virtue of
Section 14 of Labour’s Trade Union and Labour Relations Act, 1974,
trade unions enjoyed virtually unlimited immunity from actions for
damages, even if industrial action was not taken in contemplation or
furtherance of a trade dispute. They could not be sued for their
unlawful acts or for unlawful acts done on their behalf by their
officials. This breadth of immunity was quite indefensible. As long as
unions were able to shelter behind it they had no incentive to ensure
that industrial action was restricted to legitimate trade disputes and
that it was lawful in other ways. Norman therefore proposed that this
immunity should be reduced to that enjoyed by individuals under our
1980 legislation.* Both of these immunities would be restricted further
by our proposals on ‘union labour only’ requirements and changes to
tighten the definition of a trade dispute, which removed the immunity
for disputes not mainly about pay and conditions and for disputes
between trade unions.
The unions were bound to put up fierce opposition to moves which
would expose them to contempt proceedings and payment of damages.
Undoubtedly, they would claim that we were seeking to prevent their
defending their members’ interests. So it was vital for us to explain the
fairness of our proposals, and to emphasize that trade unions would
only be at risk if they acted in ways which were unlawful for
everybody else. We believed that the general public would see this as
reasonable. We proposed also to set limits on the damages which could
be awarded against a trade union, though of course there would be no
limit on the fines which a court could impose for contempt — a most
important qualification.
There was at first some opposition in Cabinet to Norman’s proposals,
not all of which came from predictable quarters. But most of us were
full of admiration for his boldness. He went away to consider some of
the points made in discussion, but the package agreed by Cabinet in
November was more or less on the lines he wanted. Norman
announced our intentions to the House of Commons later that month.
The bill was introduced the following February and the act’s main
provisions finally came into force on 1 December 1982.
Far from being unpopular, these proposals were soon being
criticized in some quarters on the grounds that they did not go far
enough. The SDP were trying to out-flank us by urging greater use of
mandatory secret ballots. Many of our own supporters wanted to see
action to stop the abuses connected with the ‘political levy’, a
substantial sum extracted from trade unionists largely for the benefit
of the Labour Party. There was continuing pressure to do something to
prevent strikes in essential services — pressure which always increased
when there was a threat of public sector strikes, as happened
frequently during 1982. But it would not have been practical to deal
with all of these issues at once in a single bill: each raised complicated

questions and we could not afford to make mistakes in this vital area. I
was convinced that the giant step being taken by Norman on the
immunity of trade union funds was sufficient for the moment. I was
glad, however, that the atmosphere had changed and that the dangers
of trade union power were now so much more widely understood. We
were winning that battle too.
Norman and I had further discussions in the summer of 1982. In
September he came forward with a paper containing his thoughts for
new industrial relations legislation which would be formally submitted
to ‘E’ Committee, with a view to inclusion in the manifesto. Norman
had already announced that we would undertake consultations with
interested parties on legislation that would require trade unions to use
secret ballots for the election of their leaders. There was strong
support in both Houses for mandatory secret ballots before industrial
action. But we were divided on this.
Ministers now discussed what should be the priorities for the
forthcoming consultative green paper. We agreed to concentrate on
ballots for the election of trade union leaders, mandatory strike
ballots, and the political levy. Norman had reservations about the use
of compulsory ballots before strikes. We had previously concluded that
these should be voluntary. Moreover, there were doubts whether or
not the use of ballots would actually reduce the frequency and length
of strikes. But I was very aware of the great advantages of linking
trade union reform to the unassailable principle of democracy, and I
was keen to see that the proposals on strike ballots were expressed in a
positive way in the green paper.
We published the green paper under the title Democracy in Trade
Unions, in January 1983. Ministers discussed in April where we should
go from there. We had no difficulty deciding in favour of proposals
relating to trade union elections and strike ballots. Two other issues
proved much more difficult: the prevention of strikes in essential
services and the political levy.
Public sector strikes and consequent disruption to the lives of the
general public had been a feature of life in post-war Britain. Nineteen
eighty-two was a particularly difficult year. There were two rail
disputes. There was also a long and distressing strike in the National
Health Service over pay, which began when ancillary workers took
action in May and ended in mid-December. And industrial action in
the water industry intensified interest in the whole question of how to
deal with the disruption of essential services. But the practical
difficulties of tackling the problem were immense. How should one
define an ‘essential service’? How much would it cost the taxpayer in
extra pay to secure ‘no strike’ agreements? What should be the penalty
for failure to observe a ‘no strike’ agreement?
The political levy was a second difficult subject. It was paid by trade
unionists into political funds held by their unions, the principal use of
which was, as I have noted, in fact to support the Labour Party.

Payment was on the basis of ‘contracting out’: that is, trade unionists
contributed automatically unless they specified otherwise. On the face
of it, it would have been fairer to base the system on a principle of
‘contracting in’ and some argued for the change. But ‘contracting in’
would have wreaked havoc with the Labour Party’s finances because
of its heavy dependence on the unions. Had we introduced such a
measure, there would undoubtedly have been pressure to change the
system by which some companies donated to political parties, from
which, of course, the Conservative Party heavily benefited. I never
believed that the cases were parallel: after all, trade unionists in a
closed shop could find it very difficult to avoid paying the political
levy, especially when the employer had an agreement with the union
to just ‘check off’ the levy from the employee. By contrast,
shareholders who did not approve of company donations to a political
party could either hold the Board to account for their decisions or
simply sell their shares. But the funding of political parties was a
sensitive topic. If we brought forward radical proposals on the eve of a
general election, we would be accused both of attempting to crush the
Labour Party financially and of unfairness on the matter of corporate
donations.
On Tuesday 10 May I held a meeting of ministers at which we
decided our manifesto commitment. On essential services, the
introduction of strike ballots would clearly help reduce the risk of
strikes in these areas. But we would also consult further about the
need for industrial relations in specified essential services to be
governed by adequate procedure agreements, breach of which would
deprive industrial action of immunity. On the question of the political
levy, we had evidence from the consultations on the green paper that
there was widespread disquiet about the operation of the system and
we proposed to consult with the TUC to see what action they were
prepared to take, failing which we would act ourselves. These were
matters to which we would have to return after the election. But we
had made substantial progress in reducing the overbearing power of
trade unions — much more than the fainthearted had ever believed
possible. And far from proving a political incubus it was one of our
strongest appeals to the voters.
POLICY WORK
For all sorts of reasons it is much easier to prepare for an election
when you are in government than in Opposition. You have more
information available about forthcoming events and more power to
shape them. But parties in government have disadvantages as well,
and you face two risks in particular. First, ministers can get out of the
habit of thinking politically and become cocooned in their
departments. Having to face, as I did, rigorous cross-questioning from
an often hostile House of Commons twice a week, there was little

danger that I, personally, would succumb to this: but others might.
The second risk is that having implemented its manifesto, a
government may run out of ideas. It is part of the job of ministers to
see that this does not happen in their own areas of responsibility, and
the job of the prime minister to prevent it happening to the
government as a whole.
One of the main obstacles to the kind of forward thinking which all
governments should do is the unauthorized disclosure of information
by disaffected ministers or civil servants. A particularly serious
problem arose in the last half of the 1979–83 Parliament. In March
1982 Geoffrey Howe asked officials to undertake an examination of
long-term public expenditure up to and including 1990 and its
implications for levels of taxation: their report was presented to me on
28 July. Spending ministers were inclined to think that this was just
another exercise to soften them up for cuts in public expenditure. But
in fact it was intended to get us all to examine how the long-term
momentum for the expansion of the state and public spending might
be curbed and reversed. As it turned out the paper was excessively
gloomy and its most likely scenario underestimated very substantially
the economic growth rate for the 1980s. To make matters worse, the
CPRS prepared its own paper to accompany the Treasury paper, which
contained a number of very radical options that had never been
seriously considered by ministers or by me. These included, for
example, sweeping changes in the financing of the National Health
Service and extensions of the use of charging. I was horrified by this
paper. As soon as I saw it, I pointed out that it would almost certainly
be leaked and give a totally false impression. That is exactly what
happened.
When the papers were discussed at Cabinet in early September, they
made no great impact on our thinking. Our main conclusions could
have been reached without any such exercise: that there should be no
major new expenditure commitments pending further consideration,
and that we should generally examine the scope for changing policies
in ways which would bring public spending under proper control. My
separate meetings with Keith Joseph on education and Norman Fowler
on Health and Social Security confirmed that neither of them felt in
any way attracted to the particular proposals which had been put
forward, many of which were neither desirable nor practicable. But
that failed to stop the media frenzy. A fairly full account of the CPRS
paper duly appeared in the Economist. The Observer developed the
story. The Economist later gave a blow-by-blow account of discussions
at Cabinet. The Observer and then The Times revealed still more
information. Of course, the Opposition had a field day. We were to be
plagued by talk of secret proposals and hidden manifestos up to
polling day and beyond. It was all the greatest nonsense.
There were two lessons from this incident which I never forgot. The
first was that we had political opponents about us who would stop at

nothing to distort and thereby prevent our forward thinking on policy.
The second lesson was of equal importance: it was unacceptable for
highly controversial proposals to come before Cabinet without the
prior knowledge and approval of the ministers responsible. This raised
acutely what role there could be for the CPRS.
In earlier days, the CPRS had been a valuable source of sound longrange analysis and practical advice. But it had become a freelance
‘Ministry of Bright Ideas’, some of which were sound, some not, many
remote from the Government’s philosophy. Moreover, as I have noted
earlier, a government with a clear sense of direction does not need
advice from first principles. Now, as this incident had shown, the
CPRS could become a positive embarrassment. That was why, shortly
after the election, I was to dissolve the ‘Think-Tank’, and ask two of its
members to join the in-house Policy Unit which worked more closely
with me.
Ferdy Mount was now head of my Policy Unit. I had long been a
great admirer of Ferdy’s witty and thoughtful articles even when, as
over the Falklands, I did not agree with his views; and I was delighted
when in April 1982 he agreed to succeed John Hoskyns. Ferdy was
particularly interested in all that goes under the heading of social
policy — education, criminal justice, housing, the family and so on, to
which, in the wake of the 1981 urban riots, I was increasingly turning
my attention. In late May he prepared for me a paper which contained
the outline of an approach to ‘renewing the values of society’:
This Government came to power asserting that it is the exercise of
responsibility which teaches self-discipline. But in the early stages of life it is
the experience of authority, when exerted fairly and consistently by adults,
which teaches young people how to exercise responsibility themselves. We
have to learn to take orders before we learn how to give them. This two-way
relationship between obedience and responsibility is what makes a free, selfgoverning society. And in the breakdown of that relationship we can trace
the origins of so much that has gone wrong with Britain.
If we can rebuild this relationship, we might begin to restore also respect
for law and order, respect for property, and respect for teachers and parents.
But the rebuilding itself has to be a two-way business. On the one hand, we
need to restore effective authority to teachers and parents. On the other
hand, we need to offer young people a taste of responsibility and a useful
role in society.

At this stage it was the themes rather than the particular measures
which needed to be worked out, and Ferdy and I discussed what these
should be. In education, for example, we wanted to increase parent
power, widen the variety within the state sector and see whether we
could come up with workable proposals for education vouchers. We
were concerned about the lack of knowledge displayed by many
children about our country and society, and our history and culture.
Of course, these and other topics — like all the really great issues —
were never going to be amenable to instant action. But both Ferdy and
I were convinced that at the heart of the Conservative mission is
something more than economics — however important economics

might be: there is a commitment to strengthen, or at least not
undermine, the traditional virtues which enable people to live
fulfilling lives without being a threat or a burden to others. This was
the beginning of many of the themes and ideas which would dominate
my third term of office.
Indeed, as early as June 1982 I set up an ad hoc group of ministers
to see how this ambitious programme could be developed, comprising
Keith Joseph, Willie Whitelaw, Geoffrey Howe, Norman Tebbit,
Michael Heseltine, Norman Fowler and Neil Macfarlane (as Sports
minister). I invited Janet Young to join us in October. The group was
officially — though rather misleadingly — known as the Family Policy
Group’; the first meeting was held in July 1982 and detailed work was
now commissioned. All sorts of questions came within its remit,
including the reform of the taxation of husband and wife, education
vouchers, reducing crime and the widening of home ownership
through increased discounts for the sale of council houses.
It is never easy to make the transition from policy-making in
government to writing a party manifesto. In 1982 I used a special
exercise to ease the problem. In September I wrote to Cabinet
ministers requesting them to prepare a ‘Five-Year Forward Look’ for
their departments. These papers were to summarize what had been
achieved, what was under way and what still needed to be done. I
received most of these papers just before Christmas and looked
through them over the holiday. As someone once said of British Rail
food, there was a considerable variation in quality. Relatively little
new could be said on Treasury matters because the strategy was clear
and the real test was to follow through the policies we already had.
Similarly, as regards the Health Service the main priority at that stage
was to defend our record and explain what had been achieved, rather
than embark on politically difficult new initiatives.
By contrast, in both housing and local government there was more
room for new thinking. The ‘Right to Buy’ had proved a huge success,
but the wider we could extend home ownership in this way the more
difficult it would be for Labour to oppose it. In employment, we were
preparing for the introduction of the Youth Training Scheme and
discussing the next step in trade union reform which would eventually
result in the 1984 Employment Act.
In education, Keith Joseph had begun what would be a long process
of reform. Falling school rolls had allowed us to increase to record
levels public spending per pupil and to achieve the best ever pupilteacher ratios. But extra resources only permit improved standards:
they do not ensure them. So Keith was pressing for changes in teacher
training. He was issuing new guidelines for the school curriculum.
Keith and I were also anxious to do something more to increase
parents’ power to choose by seriously investigating the possibilities of
vouchers or at least a combination of ‘open enrolment’ and ‘per capita
funding’, that is a kind of voucher applying just to the state sector.

There was a new momentum for fresh thinking at No. 10 and
ministers had taken stock of their policies. By the end of 1982,
although I was still not expecting an early general election, I felt that
the Government was moving, as it should, into the run-up for the next
campaign. There were plenty of possibilities for mishap, but our
general political position was strong and the economic prospect was
improving. Indeed, well before the end of the year I had authorized
the setting-up of party policy groups to consider these and other
proposals for the manifesto. Speculation about the date of the election
soon began.
*
*

See pp. 236–7.
See p. 107.

CHAPTER XI

Home and Dry
The background to and course of the 1983 general election campaign

THE MANIFESTO
The central importance of the manifesto in British general elections
often strikes foreign observers as slightly odd. Party manifestos in
Britain have acquired greater and greater significance over the years
and have become increasingly detailed. In the United States and
continental Europe, party ‘platforms’ have less authority and as a
result they are not nearly as closely studied. Even in Britain it is only
relatively recently that manifestos have been so full of detailed
proposals.
The first Conservative manifesto was Sir Robert Peel’s 1835 address
to his electors in Tamworth. The ‘Tamworth manifesto’, for all the
obvious differences, has one basic similarity with the Conservative
manifesto today: it was then and is now very much the party leader’s
own statement of policies.
I was never encumbered with the ramshackle apparatus of
committees and party rules which makes the drafting and approval of
Labour’s manifesto such a nightmare. However, the party leader
cannot dictate to senior colleagues: the rest of the government and
parliamentary party need to feel committed to the manifesto’s
proposals and consequently there has to be a good deal of
consultation. I discussed the question with Cecil Parkinson and we
agreed that Geoffrey Howe was the right person to oversee the
manifesto-making process. There has never been a more devout
believer in the virtues of consultation than Geoffrey. It had been
necessary to exclude the Treasury from the Falklands War Cabinet and
naturally he welcomed this chance to widen his role. As Chancellor of
the Exchequer he had the seniority and experience to supervise the
required policy work. Looking back, this arrangement was successful
in one of its aims — that of reducing the burden on me — but, as we
shall see, it turned out to have significant drawbacks. In 1987 I
decided to oversee the preparation of the manifesto myself.
The whole process began almost a year before the election. On
Saturday 19 June 1982 I approved the setting up of party policy
groups with the remit of identifying ‘tasks for Conservative
administration during the rest of this decade; to make proposals for
action where possible; where not possible, to identify subjects for
further study’. Eleven such groups were originally envisaged, though
in fact two were never set up: we dropped the idea of a group on

‘constitutional reform’ because I felt that there was really nothing of
note to say on that subject, and the terms of reference on ‘the
extension of choice’ turned out to be too vague. (This was a theme
better dealt with in detail by the other groups.) The nine we did set up
covered unemployment, enterprise, family and women’s affairs,
education, the cities and law and order, the poverty trap, the European
Community, nationalized industries and urban transport. We decided
that the chairman of each group should be a parliamentarian — an MP
or peer — who would help to select members for their group from
among the Conservative-minded in the worlds of business, academe,
voluntary service and local government. To keep the Government
informed, special advisers to the relevant Cabinet ministers would sit
in on the meetings. (Special advisers are political appointees, and so
free from the constraints of political neutrality which prevent the use
of civil servants in such roles.) Secretarial and research work was done
by members of the Conservative Research Department.
Essentially, the policy groups had two purposes. The first and more
important was to involve the Party as a whole in our thinking for the
future. In this I believe they were successful. The second was to come
up with fresh ideas for the manifesto, and unfortunately in this
purpose they failed. For one reason or another it took too long to find
appropriate chairmen and the right balance of group members. It was
not until October or November 1982 that the groups actually got down
to work — originally, optimistically, we had thought that they might
get started in July. The groups were due to report only at the end of
March 1983, but by then of course we in government were all well
advanced on our own policy work. Another problem is the human
vanity of wanting to demonstrate that you are on the inside track. All
too often their proposals trickled out through the press. Indeed, The
Times published a detailed account of the report from the Education
Policy Group.
The fact is that the really bold proposals in any manifesto can only
be developed over a considerable period of time. Relying on bright
ideas thought out at the last moment risks a manifesto that would be
incoherent and impossible to carry out. So, in the end, the real work
for the 1983 manifesto had to be done in No. 10 and by ministers in
departments.
As head of my Policy Unit at No. 10, Ferdy Mount was ideally
placed for manifesto drafting, and uniquely gifted for it too. He was
able to see how ministers were thinking from the ‘Forward Look’
papers I received at the end of 1982. The next step was taken in
February 1983, when Geoffrey Howe wrote to Cabinet colleagues,
asking them to send him their suggestions for the manifesto not later
than April. Their submissions would then be accepted, sharpened up
or rejected by a smaller group of ministers and advisers directly
responsible to me. The Treasury would keep a weather eye on the cost
of proposals — another advantage of Geoffrey’s close involvement —

with the result that we were able to say during the election that all of
our proposals had been taken into account in the latest Public
Expenditure White Paper. Since we expected the contrast between
Tory prudence and Labour profligacy to be a central issue in the
campaign, this made political as well as economic sense.
Ferdy, Geoffrey Howe, and Geoffrey’s special adviser, Adam Ridley,
worked intensively together on Ferdy’s first draft during March and
early April. Subsequently, they were joined by Cecil Parkinson, Keith
Joseph, Norman Tebbit, David Howell and Peter Cropper (the director
of the Conservative Research Department), over the weekend of 9–10
April at which departmental submissions were fully considered. By the
end of April we had a fairly complete draft, on which I worked with
Geoffrey, Cecil, Ferdy and Adam at Chequers on Sunday 24 April.
Shortly afterwards, the Party’s Advisory Committee on Policy met
under Keith Joseph’s chairmanship to give it the Party’s final seal of
approval: interestingly, in the light of later events, the main criticism
came from the two representatives of the ’22 Committee who thought
that we were not doing enough to reform the rates. On Wednesday 4
May chapters of the draft manifesto were sent for checking and
agreement to individual ministers. A few final changes were made
later still at my last pre-election strategy meeting at Chequers the
following Sunday, after which it was at last ready to go to the printers.
It was finally submitted in proof to an unofficial meeting of Cabinet.
The most important pledges in the manifesto fell into three groups.
First, we promised to accelerate privatization, which was fundamental
to our whole economic approach. If elected, we committed ourselves
to sell British Telecom, British Airways, substantial parts of British
Steel, British Shipbuilders, British Leyland and as many as possible of
Britain’s airports. The offshore oil interests of British Gas would also
be privatized and private capital would be introduced into the
National Bus Company. This was an ambitious programme — far more
extensive than we had thought would ever be possible when we came
into office only four years before.
The second important group of pledges concerned trade union
reform. Building on the consultations on our Trade Union Democracy
Green Paper, we promised legislation to require ballots for the election
of trade union governing bodies and ballots before strikes, failing
which unions would lose their immunities. As I have noted, there was
also a cautious pledge to consider legislation on the trade union
political levy and on strikes in essential services. The caution was
justified: we legislated on the former. At a time when Labour was
promising to repeal our earlier trade union reforms, we were moving
ahead with new ones: the contrast was stark, and we were sure the
voters would appreciate the fact.
The third significant group of manifesto proposals related to local
government. In particular, we promised to abolish the Greater London
Council (GLC) and the Metropolitan County Councils, returning their

functions (which we had already limited) to councils closer to the
people — the boroughs in London, and the districts in the other
metropolitan areas. The proposal surprised most people and was
subsequently portrayed as a last-minute measure, sketchily thought
out. The truth was very different. The previous year a Cabinet
committee had examined the issue very thoroughly and recommended
abolition, though past experience of leaks led me not to put the
question to Cabinet for final decision until shortly before the election.
We also promised to introduce what came to be known as ‘ratecapping’ — legislation enabling us to curb the extravagance of highspending councils, in the interests of local ratepayers and the wider
economy.

Though the manifesto took our programme forward, it was
somehow not an exciting document. The first years of Conservative
administration had been dominated by the battle against inflation and
by a different kind of warfare in the South Atlantic. Great as the
achievements were, neither economics nor defence is the kind of issue
that generates exciting material for manifestos. Social policy is very
different, but we were only really starting to turn our attention to this
area, which was to become increasingly important in the next two
Parliaments. And on this occasion at least, perhaps Geoffrey Howe was
too safe a pair of hands. I was somewhat disappointed, though
tactically I could see that it made sense for us to produce a tame
manifesto and to concentrate on exposing Labour’s wildness.
Perhaps the most important feature of the manifesto was what it did
not contain. It did not promise a change of direction or an easing of
the pace. It gave no quarter to the advocates of socialism and
corporatism. In the foreword I stated my vision of Britain and the
British:
… a great chain of people stretching back into the past and forwards into the
future. All are linked by a common belief in freedom, and in Britain’s
greatness. All are aware of their own responsibility to contribute to both.

Was I right in believing that this was the spirit of the time? Or was
socialism what the people really wanted? The electorate would shortly
give their answer.
PLANNING THE CAMPAIGN
On Wednesday 5 January 1983 I set aside a full day for discussion of
our general election strategy. It was in the recess, so we held it at
Chequers, always a relaxing place to think things out. The first half of
the morning was spent with Cecil Parkinson, Michael Spicer (Deputy
Chairman of the Party), Ian Gow and David Wolfson. We reached
provisional decisions on a number of practical issues.
One of the most important things was to decide who would
accompany me on my campaign tours. A coach had been hired and

specially fitted out to take me around the country. We tried to keep
the team as small as possible, though when the election was underway
there always seemed to be a sizeable number on the bus. My PPS, Ian
Gow, was a natural choice, with Michael Spicer taking his place on
days when he had constituency engagements. At various times either
Derek Howe or Tony Shrimsley would act as Press Officer. John
Whittingdale, years later my political secretary and then only twentythree, was chosen to do research. From Downing Street, Alison Ward
and Tessa Gaisman would type the speeches, while one of the ‘Garden
Room girls’ would keep me regularly in touch with No. 10 in case
something happened which required my immediate attention. And
last, but by no means least, we would be accompanied by my daughter
Carol, who wrote and published a daily diary of the campaign. Harvey
Thomas would go ahead to set up arrangements for meetings and
reconnoitre for the press, while his wife typed text for the Autocue,
which I now used for all big speeches. Travelling in the coach was
bound to be tiring but we knew it would allow us to obtain better
press and television pictures. Often it would be possible for me to fly
or take the train to the spot at which the tour itself began, using the
travel time to work on speech notes and briefing.
At this meeting we considered the arrangements for the manning of
the correspondence unit which would be set up to deal with my mail
during the election period. I decided to ask Sir John Eden, a former
minister who was not standing again for Parliament, to take on this
task. There was also the problem of deciding who should serve on the
Questions of Policy Committee at Central Office, set up at each
election to give authoritative answers to difficult questions put to our
candidates. I concluded that Angus Maude, who was also standing
down as a Member of Parliament, was the ideal person to chair this
Committee.
Later that morning at Chequers we were joined by several other
senior people from Central Office. They reported on their plans. One
difficulty that came around at every election was to know when to
produce the Conservative Research Department’s lengthy and rightly
famous Campaign Guide — an encyclopaedia of political facts used by
people of all political persuasions, including left-wing journalists too
lazy to do their own research. The Campaign Guide’s appearance
invariably triggered election speculation. We decided to aim at a
publication date in July, though in the event the election came earlier
and it had to be produced in a great rush to be ready for the start of
the campaign in May. We discussed other literature which would be
required for the constituencies. A Boundary Commission report was
due and though the Party would benefit substantially from its
proposals for the redistribution of seats, by the same token it was
difficult to identify precisely the critical marginal seats in which the
election would be won or lost. And it was vital that we focus our
efforts on the marginals.

We discussed how to handle television: it was likely to be even more
important than in earlier elections, though the new breakfast
television would have less impact than had often been predicted.
Gordon Reece had come over from the United States to help with this
aspect of the campaign. Gordon was a former television producer with
a unique insight into the medium. He had a much better grasp of
popular taste than might have been expected from a man whose
principal diet was champagne and cigars. He was always cheerful
himself and he never failed to cheer others too. In fact, this was one of
the few occasions when I can remember disagreeing with Gordon. He
argued that we should be prepared to accept a series of televised
debates between myself and Michael Foot, and (separately) with the
Alliance leaders. This was an exceptional suggestion: British prime
ministers have never accepted challenges to election debates of this
kind. The calculation usually is that prime ministers have nothing to
gain from them, and quite a lot to lose. But I stood so much better in
the polls than Michael Foot that Gordon thought that on this occasion
the orthodoxy was wrong and that I could only gain from such a
confrontation. I rejected the idea. I disliked the way that elections
were being turned into media circuses. And, as I have already said, I
did not underrate Michael Foot as a debater. In any case, the
arguments were too important to be reduced to a ‘sound bite’ or a
gladiatorial sport.
One of our principal assets was the state of the Party’s organization.
Cecil Parkinson had done wonders for Central Office. He had brought
the Party’s finances into order in the year or so since he had become
Chairman: this was essential, because it is only by husbanding
resources in mid-term that you can afford to spend as heavily as
required in a general election campaign. Cecil had also brought in
some very able people. Peter Cropper had reintroduced rigorous
standards in the Research Department. Tony Shrimsley, in charge of
press relations, was a highly professional and talented journalist who
shared my own outlook; sadly, this was to be his last campaign — he
was probably already fatally ill. Cecil had placed Chris Lawson in
charge of a new Marketing Department, which dealt with opinion
research and publicity; Chris was that rare and useful animal, a
businessman with acute political instincts.
In the afternoon Tim Bell presented a paper summarizing the
strengths and weaknesses of our position, based upon opinion polls.
Tim had a more sensitive set of antennae than most politicians. He
could pick up quicker than anyone else a change in the national mood.
And, unlike most advertising men, he understood that selling ideas is
different from selling soap. Tim set out a communications strategy
whose main theme was ‘keep on with the change’, an approach which
I welcomed. Its wisdom lay in the perception that it was the
Conservative Government rather than the Opposition parties which
was the radical force in British society. As we ourselves had shown in

1979, there are few more potent slogans for an Opposition than that it
is ‘time for a change’. Tim showed that we could deprive Labour of
that slogan and turn the argument against them.
We held another all-day session on general election strategy at
Chequers on Thursday 7 April. Manifesto work was in its final stages
by then and I was worried that campaign planning seemed to be
taking place in a separate compartment. However, that could not be
helped. The key members of the Central Office team, along with Tim
Bell, Ferdy Mount, David Wolfson, Ian Gow and myself ran over the
style and content of the campaign and, in particular, my part in it. By
now speculation about an early general election was feverish and there
was little or nothing that I could do to prevent it, without firmly ruling
out an early election, which of course would have been a very foolish
thing to do. I had already stated in public that I would not go to the
country before the end of our fourth year and at this meeting I made
no secret of the fact that my own instincts were against an early
election; I had in mind an election in October. Certainly, the argument
was finely balanced. Were we to wait, there was a danger that if the
polls started to turn in Labour’s favour the prospect of their grossly
irresponsible economic policies being implemented would weaken
sterling and hold back investment. It is also generally true, as Jim
Callaghan learnt to his cost when he postponed the election in the
autumn of 1978, that in politics the ‘unexpected happens’. However,
on the other side of the argument, I was convinced that we were now
seeing sustainable economic recovery, which would continue to
strengthen the longer we waited: clearly, the more solid economic
good news we could show the better.
But, of course, the overriding consideration in choosing an election
date is whether or not you think you are going to win. On Sunday 8
May I had a final Chequers meeting with Cecil Parkinson, Willie
Whitelaw, Geoffrey Howe, Norman Tebbit, Michael Jopling, Ferdy
Mount, David Wolfson and Ian Gow. There had been local government
elections on Thursday 5 May and we knew that the results would tell
us a good deal about our prospects. Central Office staff had worked
furiously to provide a detailed computer analysis by the weekend. We
also had the evidence provided by private and public opinion polls.
Even when Cecil Parkinson took us through the information Central
Office had brought together, I had some lingering doubt about
whether the prospects really were good enough. I needed some
convincing: calling an election is a big decision, and by constitutional
convention it is a matter for the prime minister alone, however much
advice is on offer. It was also, of course, a decision that I had never
had to make before. Cecil and the others argued for June. It was
pointed out that the main economic indicators would look slightly
better then than in the autumn because inflation was due to rise
slightly in the second half of the year. We would also probably face a
by-election in Cardiff if we did not go soon: the Welsh Nationalists

were threatening to move the writ and we had no way of stopping
them. By-elections are unpredictable and there was the risk that the
third-party bandwagon could be persuaded to roll if it went ahead. But
the argument that told most with me was the level of election fever.
The speculation was becoming impossible. Of course, I would be
accused of ‘cutting and running’ if I went to the country in June, but
the same critics would say I was ‘clinging to power’ if I put the
election off; and probably the most damaging thing is to look as if you
are afraid of testing your mandate.
By long-established custom, elections take place on a Thursday: if
we were to go in June, which Thursday should it be? Again, Cecil and
Central Office had done their homework, preparing a list of
forthcoming events. From this it seemed that the second Thursday in
June would be best, although this meant that the campaign would
have to include a Bank Holiday — something electioneers prefer to
avoid since it is almost impossible to campaign over that weekend. But
Ascot began the following Monday and I did not like the idea of
television screens during the final or penultimate week of the
campaign filled with pictures of toffs and ladies in exotic hats while
we stumped the country urging people to turn out and vote
Conservative. Therefore, if we went in June it would have to be the
9th, rather than the 16th or 23rd.
These were persuasive arguments. But I did not make up mind
finally that day, returning to No. 10 only provisionally convinced.
When I am making a big decision, I always prefer to sleep on it.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS
The following morning just before 7 o’clock I rang down to the duty
clerk asking my principal private secretary, Robin Butler, to see me as
soon as he came in: Robin would arrange for an audience with the
Queen later that morning. I had decided to seek a dissolution and go
to the country on Thursday 9 June.
There was now much to be done. I saw the Chief Whip and the Party
Chairman to tell them of my decision, summoned a special Cabinet for
II.15 a.m. and went on to the Palace at 12.25 p.m. The rest of the day
was spent discussing final election campaign preparations and the
manifesto, and recording interviews. We had some important decisions
to make about government business in Parliament. Two major bills —
the Telecommunications and the Police and Criminal Evidence Bills —
would have to be abandoned, though of course we would be able to
reintroduce them if we formed the next government. The Finance Bill
had to become law before Parliament dissolved — without it
government authority to levy taxation would lapse — and to secure a
quick passage for the bill we had to negotiate with the Opposition.
Labour was inept: they gave us a parting gift by forcing the
abandonment of a number of tax cuts proposed in the Finance Bill,

including increases in the threshold at which the higher rate of income
tax would begin and in the amount of tax relief for mortgages. They
were quite happy to brand Labour the party of higher taxation: so
were we.
I also had to make some decisions about my future engagements as
Prime Minister, particularly meetings already arranged with foreign
visitors: which, if any, should I see? A number of meetings were
cancelled, but I carried on with as much of my diary schedule as I
could. On Wednesday 11 May, I had talks and lunch with Robert
Muldoon, Prime Minister of New Zealand, who had proved such a
good friend to Britain in the Falklands crisis. That evening I also saw
Alexander Solzhenitzyn and his wife. This courageous man sent a
timely message to the British people at a press conference he gave,
describing supporters of unilateral disarmament as ‘naïve’.
Another question was whether I should go to the United States for
the forthcoming G7 summit at Williamsburg at the end of May. I
decided immediately that I had to cancel my planned visit Washington
on 26 May for pre-summit talks with President Reagan. As for the
Williamsburg summit itself, I was minded to go but kept my options
open for the moment. Politicians always have to be careful not to be
seen spending more time with opposite numbers abroad than with
their own people and that is never truer than in an election campaign.
But the summit was important in its own right, not least because the
President himself would be chairing it. Moreover, it would show
Britain in a leading international role and lend international
endorsement to the sort of policies we were pursuing.
We deliberately started our campaign later than the other parties.
The electorate quickly becomes bored with incessant party politicking
and it is important not to peak too soon: the ideal is to make an
increasing impact in the last few days before polling day itself.
Labour’s manifesto, all over the newspapers shortly before the
dissolution of Parliament, was an appalling document. It committed
the party to a non-nuclear defence, withdrawal from the European
Community, enormously increased public spending and a host of other
irresponsible policies and was dubbed by one of the wittier Shadow
Cabinet ministers ‘the longest suicide note ever written’. We were very
keen to publicize it and I understand that Conservative Central Office
placed the largest single order for copies. But at my customary address
to the ’22 that evening, I warned the Party against overconfidence:
even a short election campaign is quite long enough for things to go
badly wrong.
The next day I flew to Scotland to address the Scottish Conservative
Party Conference in Perth. The hall in Perth is not large, but it has
excellent acoustics. It is one of the best places to speak anywhere in
Britain — perhaps only Blackpool Winter Gardens is better. In spite of
a sore throat from the tail-end of a heavy cold, I enjoyed myself. Not
only do I always recall that this is the nation of Adam Smith: the

romantic strain of Scottish Toryism appeals to the non-economist in
me too. As always after visits to the Scottish Conference, I returned to
London encouraged and in fighting spirit. The atmosphere had been
one of buoyant enthusiasm — a good omen for the campaign.
That weekend I was also able to study the results of our first major
‘state of battle’ opinion poll survey. It showed that we had a 14 per
cent lead over Labour and that there had been a fall in support for the
Alliance. This was, of course, very satisfactory. I was glad to note that
there was no evidence that people thought I had been wrong to call
the election; indeed, the great majority thought it was the correct
decision. But the poll also showed that if the Alliance looked in with a
chance there was considerable potential for an increase in its support
from weakly committed Conservative and Labour voters. Obviously
this was something we would have to guard against.
THE CAMPAIGN BEGINS
In 1983, as in 1979 and 1987, we usually began the morning with a
press conference on a prearranged topic. Before the press conference I
was briefed in Central Office — during this election by Stephen
Sherbourne, who managed to be both quick and methodical and who
would shortly join my team in Downing Street as political secretary.
This briefing took place at 8.30 a.m. in a cramped room at Central
Office. We would begin by approving the day’s press release and go on
to consider questions likely to come up. Someone from the
Conservative Research Department would come in part way through
the briefing to report what had happened at Labour’s press conference
— somewhat easier then than now, for at that time Labour
headquarters was at Transport House, just across the road from
Central Office in Smith Square. It was convenient too that Labour’s
daily schedule ran ahead of ours. Our press conference would begin at
9.30 a.m. and was planned to last an hour. We had arranged my tours
so that I spent very few nights away from London, and therefore I was
nearly always available to chair it. I would field some of the questions
myself, but try to give whichever ministers were appearing beside me
that morning a chance to make their points. We were willing to
change the subject of the day almost up to the last minute. In fact,
during this campaign we were able to keep to the planned topics,
though extra press conferences, which I did not attend, were arranged
to deal with particular matters like Labour’s social security spending
pledges.
Our main aim both in the press conferences and speeches was to
deal with the difficult question of unemployment by showing that we
were prepared to take it head on and prove that our policies were the
best to provide jobs in the future. So successful were we in this that by
the end of the campaign the opinion polls showed that we were more
trusted to deal with this problem than Labour. People knew that the

real reasons for the high level of unemployment were not Conservative
policies but rather past overmanning and inefficiency, strikes,
technological change, changes in the pattern of world trade and the
international recession. Labour lost the argument when they tried to
place the whole blame for this deep-seated problem on the callous,
uncaring Tories.
Then there were the speeches. During the campaign I used Sundays
— almost the only time available — to work on speeches for the
forthcoming week with Ferdy Mount and others at Chequers. I often
saw Ferdy for final revision when I arrived back in No. 10 from
campaigning during the day. He had prepared about half a dozen
speech drafts on different topics before the campaign. The actual
speeches I delivered consisted of extracts from these, with additional
material often provided by Ronnie Millar and John Gummer, and
topical comment addressing the issue of the day. I would put on the
finishing touches in the campaign coach, trains, aeroplanes, cars and
just about anywhere else you can imagine along the campaign trail.
There were a few big speeches during this election but a large number
of short speeches on ‘whistle stops’, often delivered off the back of a
lorry on a small mobile platform, always off the cuff. I preferred the
whistle stops, particularly when there were some hecklers. People tell
me that I am an old-fashioned campaigner; I enjoy verbal combat,
though it has to be said that neither I nor the crowds derived much
intellectual challenge from the monotonous chants of the CND and
Socialist Worker protesters who followed me round the country.
Third, there were the tours themselves. The basic principle, of
course, is that you should concentrate the Leader’s appearances in
marginal seats. One day on the campaign bus David Wolfson chided
me for waving too much to people watching us pass: ‘only wave in
marginals, Prime Minister’. As the importance of television and the
‘photo-opportunity’ increases, the leader’s physical location on a
particular day is rather less important than it once was. In this
election, moreover, our objective was to hold our vote and our seats so
that (with a limited number of exceptions) my task was to concentrate
on campaigning in Conservative-held seats. But one thing you must do
is to visit all the main regions of the country: nothing is more
devastating to candidates and party workers than to think they have
been written off.
Finally, there were the interviews. These came in quite different
styles. Brian Waiden on Weekend World would ask the most probing
questions. Robin Day on Panorama was probably the most aggressive,
though in this campaign he made the mistake of plunging into detail
on the problem of calculating the impact of unemployment on the
public finances — a gaffe when cross-examining a former Minister of
National Insurance. I made a gaffe of my own calling Sir Robin ‘Mr
Day’ throughout. Alistair Burnet specialized in short, subtle questions
which sounded innocuous but contained hidden dangers. One needed

all one’s nimbleness of wit to make it unscathed through the
minefields. Then there were the programmes on which members of the
public asked questions. My favourite was always the Granada 500
when a large audience quizzes you about the things which really
matter to them.
Our manifesto was launched at the first Conservative press
conference on Wednesday 18 May. The whole Cabinet was there. I ran
through the main proposals, and then Geoffrey Howe, Norman Tebbit
and Tom King made short statements on their sections of the
manifesto. After that I invited questions. Manifestos rarely make the
headlines unless, as on this occasion, something goes wrong. The press
will consign carefully thought-out proposals for government to an
inside page and concentrate on the slightest evidence of a ‘split’. At the
press conference a journalist asked Francis Pym about negotiations
with Argentina. I felt that Francis’s reply risked being ambiguous, so I
interrupted to make clear that while we would negotiate on
commercial and diplomatic links, we would not discuss sovereignty.
The press highlighted this: but there was in fact no split. That’s
politics.
D-21 TO D-14
In Britain the general election campaign is only about four weeks long,
usually less. For planning purposes during elections we always used
the so-called ‘D- (minus)’ system, numbering each day in a countdown
to ‘D-Day’ — polling day itself. The most intense period of the
campaign is from D-21 on, which in this case fell on Thursday 19 May.
We opened our campaign on D-20, Friday 20 May, two days after the
launch of the manifesto. The first of our five Party Election Broadcasts
(PEBs) had been shown on D-23.
It was not Francis Pym’s week. He told a questioner on BBC’s
Question Time that in his opinion ‘landslides on the whole don’t
produce successful governments.’ Naturally, people drew the inference
that he did not want us to win a large majority. Of course, this was all
very well for those with safe seats like Francis himself. But it was
distinctly less good news for candidates in the Conservative marginals
and those of our people hoping to win seats from other parties. And
since complacency was likely to be our worst enemy in the campaign
this remark struck a wrong note.
The first regular press conference on the campaign took place on
Friday 20 May. Geoffrey Howe challenged Labour on the cost of their
manifesto proposals and said that if they did not publish them we
would. This was the first deployment of a very effective campaign
theme. Patrick Jenkin, taking it up, drew attention to Labour’s plans
for nationalization and regulation of industry. There were a number of
questions about the economy. But, inevitably, what the press really
wanted to know was what I thought about Francis’s remark. We had

seen this coming and I had discussed what to say at the briefing
session earlier that morning. Francis had been Chief Whip under Ted
Heath and I made that the basis of my reply:
I think I could handle a landslide majority all right. I think the comment
you’re referring to was natural Chief Whip’s caution. Ex-Chief Whip’s
caution. You know there’s a club of Chief Whips. They’re very unusual
people.

I left after the press conference for my first campaign tour, which
was in the West Country. At 10.45 a.m. we drove from Central Office
to Victoria Station, and from there went by train to Gatwick to catch
the flight to St Mawgan in Cornwall. A group of around 40 or 50
journalists joined us, sitting together at the back of the plane. It was a
pleasant rural day. I visited the fish market at Padstow Harbour and
went on to Trelyll Farm, near Wadebridge. There I was caught out by
the press. I was standing on a heap of cut grass and the Daily Mirror
photographer asked me to pick some up. I saw nothing wrong with
that, and so I obliged. He took his photograph — and the picture duly
appeared the following day with the caption ‘Let them eat grass’. It
does not do to be too co-operative.
It was on Monday 23 May (D-17) that my campaign began in
earnest. We started as usual with a briefing meeting for that morning’s
press conference where we spent some time discussing the Party’s
advertising. Saatchi & Saatchi had devised some brilliant
advertisements and posters in 1979. Most of those they produced in
1983 were not quite as good, although there were exceptions. One
compared the Communist and Labour Party manifestos by printing
side by side a list of identical commitments from each. It was a long
list. A second poster set out 14 rights and freedoms that the voter
would be signing away if Labour was elected and carried out its
programme. Another poster aimed at winning us support from ethnic
minorities with the slogan ‘Labour Think He’s Black, Conservatives
Think He’s British’ caused some controversy. But I thought it was
perfectly fair. I did, however, veto one showing a particularly
unflattering picture of Michael Foot with the slogan: ‘Under The
Conservatives All Pensioners Are Better Off’. Maybe that was a fair
political point too: but I do not like personal attacks.
My speech that evening was at the Cardiff City Hall. It was a long
speech, made a little longer but much more lively when I broke away
from the text, which always seems to help the delivery. I covered all
the main election issues — jobs, health, pensions, defence — but the
lines I liked best related to Labour’s plans for savings:
Under a Labour government, there’s virtually nowhere you can put your
savings where they would be safe from the state. They want your money for
state socialism, and they mean to get it. Put your savings in the bank — and
they’ll nationalize it. Put your savings in a pension fund or a life assurance
company — and a Labour government would force them to invest the money
in their own socialist schemes. If you put money in a sock they’d probably
nationalize socks.

I had returned early to No. 10 from Tuesday’s daily tour in order to
prepare for a Question and Answer session with Sue Lawley on
Nationwide. This unfortunately degenerated into an argument about
the sinking of the General Belgrano.

The Left thought it was scoring points by keeping the public’s
attention focused on this, exploiting minor discrepancies to support its
theory of a ruthless government intent on slaughter. This was not only
odious; it was inept. The voters overwhelmingly accepted our view
that protecting British lives came first. On the Belgrano, as on
everything else, the Left’s obsessions were at variance with their
interests. But I found the whole episode distasteful.
Wednesday 25 May was a difficult day for both the major parties,
though we suffered far less damage than Labour. The Labour Party
was so ineffective during the campaign that the newspapers, in
desperation for stories, concentrated heavily on leaked documents.
The main interest on this occasion was the leaking of a draft report of
the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee, which attacked our
economic policies. Cecil Parkinson contacted Edward du Cann, the
Committee Chairman, who promptly issued a statement drawing
attention to the fact that the report had not been approved by the
committee. It was typical of the Labour Party’s lack of grip that they
completely missed this opportunity to embarrass us, preferring to
spend their morning press conference talking about ‘women’s issues’.
We were amazed. As we joked about it I said to my male colleagues at
the briefing session: ‘if they have their way, you’ll soon be having the
babies.’
Our press conference that day, though allegedly on defence, was in
fact devoted to the revelation that our candidate at Stockton South
had once been a member of the National Front. He had left the
National Front some years before and now claimed to be an orthodox
Conservative and regretted his past. As far as we were concerned this
was a peripheral embarrassment but some left-wing journalists seemed
to see themselves as Woodward and Bernstein, fighting the
Establishment. Again, it served to distract the Labour Party from issues
of genuine interest to the public.
The Labour Party was now in deep trouble. That same day — the
very day we had chosen to devote to defence — Jim Callaghan made a
speech in Wales rejecting unilateral nuclear disarmament. The
newspapers were full of contradictory statements about Labour’s
position on nuclear weapons. Even among Labour front-benchers there
was disarray: you could choose between Michael Foot, Denis Healey
and John Silkin — each seemed to have his own defence policy.
Michael Heseltine at our press conference and throughout the
campaign was devastating in his criticisms of Labour’s policy.
I always realized that there were a few issues on which Labour was
especially vulnerable — issues on which they had irresponsible

policies but ones to which the public attached great importance. They
were the ‘gut issues’. Defence was one. Another was public spending,
where the voters always have a suspicion that Labour will spend and
tax too much. For that reason I was very keen that Geoffrey Howe do a
more comprehensive costing of Labour’s manifesto promises than
usual. He produced a superb analysis that ran to twenty pages. It
showed that Labour’s plans implied additional spending in the life of a
Parliament of between £36–43 billion — the latter figure almost equal
to the total revenue of income tax at that time. Labour’s economic
credibility never recovered. Indeed, Labour’s profligacy has been its
Achilles heel in every election I have fought — all the more reason for
a Conservative government to manage the nation’s economic affairs
prudently.
That Wednesday my election tour took me to the East of England,
travelling by aeroplane and coach. It was a beautiful day. I spent part
of it campaigning in East Dereham in Norfolk for Richard Ryder. As I
have noted, he had been my political secretary, and I was glad to be
able to help. And, of course, his wife, Caroline, had also worked for
me. Almost a family occasion. I addressed a crowd in the packed
market square. There were a few hecklers which made it more fun. I
let rip with an old-fashioned barnstorming speech. Later someone told
me that above the platform where I had stood to deliver the speech
there was a large cinema sign advertising a film called The Missionary.
D-14 TO D-7
On Thursday 26 May (D-14) the opinion polls reported in the press
gave us anything between a 13 and 19 per cent lead over Labour. The
principal danger from now on would be complacency among
Conservative voters rather than any desperate Labour attempts at a
comeback.
Thursday was to be another pleasant day of traditional campaigning,
this time in Yorkshire. One highlight was lunch in Harry Ramsden’s
Fish and Chip Shop — the ‘biggest fish and chip shop in the Free
World’ — in Leeds. I thoroughly enjoyed myself but the occasion was
quite chaotic, with cameramen crashing around among the startled
diners.
That evening I spoke at the Royal Hall, Harrogate, dwelling on a
theme which was central to my political strategy. The turbulence of
politics in the 1970s and 1980s had overturned the set patterns of
British politics. Labour’s own drift to the left and the extremism of the
trade unions had disillusioned and fractured its traditional support.
The SDP and the Liberals failed to grasp the significance of what was
happening. They projected their appeal to the middle-class Left,
especially those who worked in the public sector, probably, I suspect,
because Roy Jenkins and Shirley Williams instinctively sought out
their own kind and allowed that instinct to overcome their judgement.

In fact, the more numerous and dissatisfied Labour supporters were in
the rising working and lower-middle class — the same group that in
America Ronald Reagan was winning over and who were known as
‘Reagan Democrats’. They were benefiting from the opportunities we
had made available, especially the sale of council houses; more
important, they shared our values, including a strong belief in family
life and an intense patriotism. We now had an opportunity to bring
them into the Conservative fold, and I directed my speech at
Harrogate to doing just that:
In this country the things that most of us believe in are greater than the
things that divide us. There are people in all walks of life who share our
vision, but who have not voted for us in the past. At this election there is so
much at stake that I feel I must say to them: the Labour Party today is not
the party you used to support. It no longer stands for the traditions and
liberties which made this country great. It is the Conservative Party that has
stayed true to those traditions and those liberties.

Politicians generally dislike elections. But one advantage is that in the
course of a campaign you see a great deal of the country that would
otherwise be concealed in reports and memoranda. For example, no
official report could convey the excitement of the advanced electronics
factories around Reading that I visited on the Friday. It was also my
first encounter with the portable telephone.
By the time that I arrived back in London there had been yet
another extraordinary development in Labour’s campaign. Labour’s
General Secretary, Jim Mortimer, reported to an astonished press
corps that ‘the unanimous view of the campaign committee is that
Michael Foot is the Leader of the Labour Party.’ With statements like
that one wondered how long either of them would keep his job.
My own mind that evening was very much on the forthcoming G7
economic summit at Williamsburg, for which I would leave for the
United States at midday on Saturday. President Reagan was keen to
have me there. He had sent me a message on 10 May to say that he
would perfectly understand if I was not able to come to Washington
for a pre-summit bilateral meeting, but that he very much hoped I
would go to Williamsburg. The message concluded:
I wish you every success in the election and in gaining another mandate to
carry out the courageous and principled policies which you have begun.

Above all, he wanted me to win — just as I always wanted him to
win. I received a report whose authenticity I had no reason to doubt
that the President had said that no pressure was to be put on me one
way or another about attending the summit. ‘Hell,’ he was reported to
have said, ‘the main thing is for her to get re-elected.’ I shared his
analysis.
Whatever its electoral implications for me, there was no doubt that
the Williamsburg summit was of real international importance.
President Reagan was determined to make a success of it. At previous

G7 summits the scope for genuine discussion had been somewhat
limited by the fact that a draft communiqué had been drawn up even
before the leaders met. This time the Americans had insisted that we
should discuss first and draft later, which, however inconvenient for
officials, was far more sensible. But I took along a British draft just in
case it was needed.
The atmosphere at Williamsburg was excellent, not just because of
the President’s own radiant good humour but because of the place
itself. In the surroundings of this restored Virginian town each head of
government stayed in a separate house. We were welcomed by
friendly townspeople in old-style colonial dress. There was a complete
contrast with the perhaps overluxurious feel of Versailles.

I had a long tête-à-tête discussion with the President. It ranged over
a wide field: from nuclear disarmament negotiations to the state of the
American economy and the protectionist leanings of the US Congress
— something which was giving us increasing concern. Later I had a
short but important talk with Prime Minister Nakasone of Japan. I had
met him when I visited his country as Leader of the Opposition. He
was perhaps the most articulate and ‘western’ of Japan’s leaders in the
period when I was Prime Minister, raising his country’s international
profile and fostering close links with the United States. On this
occasion, my main interest was to press for Nissan to finalize its
decision to invest in Britain, which I hoped would create thousands of
jobs. Understandably, Mr Nakasone’s line was that this was a decision
for the company. I should add here that it had been reported in the
British press that Nissan would not have gone ahead with their
investment had Labour been elected. This was publicly denied by the
company, but it was probably true.
The two main objectives which President Reagan and I shared for
the summit were the reaffirmation of sound economic policies and a
public demonstration of our unity behind NATO’s position on arms
control, especially as regards the deployment of Cruise and Pershing II
missiles. I introduced the discussion on arms control at dinner on
Saturday. In fact, by that morning we had what most of us considered
a satisfactory draft communiqué. France’s position — as a country
outside the NATO command structure — required to be taken into
account. But President Mitterrand said that he had no dispute with the
substance of our proposal. In fact, he came up with an amendment
that we were able to accept, because it strengthened it in the direction
we wanted. It seems improbable that President Mitterrand realized
this.
Pierre Trudeau of Canada did have a problem with a strong line on
deterrence. He urged us all to ‘speak more softly’ to the Soviet Union.
There followed some exchanges between the two of us which I later
described in a letter to him as ‘on the lively side’. In the end, a
thoroughly satisfactory text on arms control emerged.

The text on the economy was pretty satisfactory as well, except for a
little misty language on exchange rate co-ordination. President
Mitterrand had been tempted at one stage by grand talk of a ‘new
Bretton Woods’, shorthand for the system of fixed exchange rates
which had operated from 1944 to 1973. But he did not press this view
at Williamsburg.
I came home by the overnight British Airways flight, confident that
the outcome of the summit vindicated my approach to the crucial
election issues of defence and the economy. This summit also marked
a change in the relationship between President Reagan and the other
heads of government. They might previously have admired his
eloquence and devotion to principle: but they had sometimes been
dismissive of his grasp of detail. I, myself, had felt some concern about
this earlier. Not so on this occasion. He had plainly done his
homework. He had all the facts and figures at his fingertips. He steered
the discussions with great skill and aplomb. He managed to get all he
wanted from the summit, while allowing everyone to feel that they
had got at least some of what they wanted, and he did all this with an
immense geniality. What President Reagan demonstrated at
Williamsburg was that in international as in domestic affairs he was a
master politician.
Monday 30 May was a Bank Holiday. That day Denis Healey
released what the Labour Party claimed was the ‘real’ Conservative
manifesto, a fantastical affair, full of lies, half-truths and scares culled
from reports of leaked documents, especially the CPRS long-term
public expenditure document, the whole thing imaginatively
embellished. I was not surprised. Labour had tried this tactic in 1979:
it had not worked then either. Once again, Labour was catering not to
the interests of the voter but to its own obsessions. They failed to
realize that propaganda can never persuade people of the incredible.
Apparently, you can persuade the press of this, however.
On Tuesday evening I was to speak at George Watson’s College in
Edinburgh. My idea was to use the occasion to report on Williamsburg
and to defend our record on the social services. But looking at the
material we already had written, I realized that we had a lot of work
still to do and the whole thing was finished in a tremendous rush, as
not infrequently happens with my speeches. Several of us spent the
early evening before the speech crawling around the floor of my room
at the Caledonian Hotel, sticking together bits of text with sellotape.
After that we flew further north to Inverness, where we stayed the
night. A large crowd of chanting protesters outside our hotel
serenaded us to sleep.
The next day (Wednesday 1 June, D-8) I held a press conference,
gave television interviews, visited two Scottish factories, flew to
Manchester, visited a bakery in Bolton and a brewery in Stockport,
and flew back to London to begin work on another speech. I am not
usually much affected either by pressure of work or by attacks from

opponents. But this day was a little different. Denis Healey made the
tasteless remark that I had been ‘glorying in slaughter’ during the
Falklands War. I was both angry and upset. We had deliberately
decided not to raise the Falklands in the campaign and had done
nothing whatsoever to make it an issue. The remark hurt and offended
many people besides me — not all of them Conservatives —
particularly the relatives of those who had fought and died in the war.
Mr Healey later made a half-hearted retraction: he had meant to say
‘conflict’ rather than ‘slaughter’ — a distinction without a difference.
Neil Kinnock returned to the subject a few days later, in an even more
offensive form, if that were possible. These remarks were all the more
revealing because they were politically stupid: indeed they did
enormous harm to Labour. They were not made from political
calculation, but can only have emerged from something coarse and
brutal in the imagination.
D-7 TO D-Day
Nonetheless at Thursday morning’s press conference there was yet
more about the General Belgrano and I could not conceal my irritation
at the failure of some journalists to grasp the harsh reality of war. I
said:
I think it is utterly astonishing that your only allegation against me is that I
in fact changed the rules of engagement with the consent of the War Cabinet
to enable a ship which was a danger to our task force to be sunk.

On Friday, after the press conference, Cecil and I had now to decide
whether we needed a full-scale newspaper advertising campaign over
the weekend. Two opinion polls that day showed us with leads of 11
and 17 per cent over Labour. We were being told that we were home
and dry. But many voters make up their minds in the last week, some
indeed as they are on their way to the polling station; so I have always
been a wary campaigner. Cecil was an equally battle-scarred
electioneer and we had planned to run expensive three-page
advertisements in the Sunday newspapers. But we decided to take a
risk and save the money, cutting the advertisements to a more
economical two pages. On this my political calculations coincided with
my instincts as a Grantham grocer’s daughter. Obvious extravagance is
bad advertising.
I spent Saturday (D-5) campaigning in Westminster North, then
going on to the constituencies in Ealing and Hendon close to my own.
I campaigned in Finchley for most of the afternoon and then went to
support our candidate in Hampstead and Highgate.
On my return to No. 10 work began almost at once on the speech I
was to deliver the next day at our Youth Rally at Wembley Conference
Centre. My speech writers and I worked late into the night, breaking
for a hot meal which I served up in the kitchen from the capacious

store of precooked frozen food I always kept there for such occasions.
Shepherd’s pie and a glass of wine can do a great deal to improve
morale. Speech writing was for me an important political activity. As
one of my speech writers said, ‘no one writes speeches for Mrs
Thatcher: they write speeches with Mrs Thatcher.’ Every written word
goes through the mincing machine of my criticism before it gets into a
speech. These are occasions for thinking creatively and politically and
for fashioning larger themes into which particular policies fit. I often
found myself drawing on phrases and ideas from these sessions when I
was speaking off the cuff, answering questions at Prime Minister’s
Question Time and for television interviews. This helped to preserve
me from the occupational hazard of long-serving ministers: so I was
never accused of thinking like a civil servant. (They had to think like
me.) These occasions often continued long into the night and can
perhaps be described as fraught but fun.
So was the Youth Rally. Some of the sourer critics chose to take
offence at joke remarks made by the comedian who preceded my
appearance on stage. What they really took offence at was the broad
social appeal of the new Conservative Party demonstrated both by the
unconventional people on the stage and in the audience. As one punk
rocker told a journalist at the time: ‘Better the iron lady than those
cardboard men.’
One of the opinion polls on Sunday put the Alliance ahead of Labour
for the first time. This gave the last days of the campaign a new feel
and a new uncertainty. But personally I never believed that the
Alliance would beat Labour into third place — even though the Labour
leaders were doing their best to ensure it did.
I chaired our last press conference of the campaign on Wednesday
morning (D-1), accompanied by more or less the same team as had
launched the manifesto. There was an end-of-term feeling among the
journalists, which we felt confident enough to share. I said that the
vital issues on which the voters must decide between the parties were
defence, jobs, social services, home ownership and the rule of law. I
was keen to answer the charge that a large Conservative majority
would lead us to ditch our manifesto policies and pursue a ‘hidden
agenda’ of an extreme kind. I argued that a large Conservative
majority would in fact do something quite different: it would be a
blow against extremism in the Labour Party. And that, I think, was the
real underlying theme of the 1983 general election.
Election day itself is an oddly frustrating time. I always voted early
and then visited the Finchley committee rooms, each of which would
be receiving information as to which of our known supporters had
voted: later in the day party workers would visit those who had not
done so to urge them on to the polling stations. All the opinion polls
suggested a Tory landslide. But I have seen too many electoral upsets
in my life to take such things for granted.

The Finchley count takes place in Hendon Town Hall. The result was
late in coming through because of the number of other candidates
anxious to gain publicity for their cause by fighting against me. It was
made later still on this occasion because one of them successfully
demanded a re-count. (My eventual majority was 9314.) It was not
until well into the early hours of the morning that my result was
declared and I was safely returned for the eighth time.
While waiting for my own count to finish I watched the national
results coming in on television. The first three were not particularly
encouraging: in both Torbay and Guilford the Alliance vote was up
substantially, though we held the seats. Then there was worse news:
we lost Yeovil to the Liberals. But the turning point came soon after —
the first Tory gain from Labour: Nuneaton. From then on the shape
and size of our victory became clearer and clearer. It really was a
landslide. We had won a majority of 144: the largest of any party since
1945.
I returned to Conservative Central Office in the early hours. I was
greeted by cheering party staff as I entered and gave a short speech of
thanks to them for their efforts. After that I returned to No. 10. Crowds
had gathered at the end of Downing Street and I went along to talk to
them as I had on the evening of the Argentine surrender. Then I went
up to the flat. Over the previous weeks I had spent some time clearing
things out, in case we lost the election. Now the clutter could build up
again.

CHAPTER XII

Back to Normalcy
Politics, the economy and foreign affairs from the election to the end of
1983

Political success is a good deal pleasanter than political failure, but it
too brings its problems. Conventional wisdom, reinforced by classical
mythology, has it that this is all a matter of hubris or at least of
complacency. But it is not always so. Nor was it in fact during the
somewhat troubled six months which followed the 1983 general
election. On this occasion there were subtler problems. One was that
the media, having felt obliged during the election campaign to cover
real political arguments about practical choices, soon reverted to the
more amusing sport of scoring points off the Government. And there
was a second problem, which we encountered increasingly over the
years, that the less the socialist threat seemed, the more people were
inclined to jib at the inevitable difficulties and disappointments of
running a free enterprise economy.
In 1983 we also had two other problems to face — one of our own
making and one not. The first was that the 1983 manifesto did not
inspire the Government with the sort of crusading spirit which would
have got us off to a good start in the new Parliament. Some of the
main pledges were popular enough, such as the abolition of the GLC
and Metropolitan Counties and the introduction of rate-capping, but
they ran into a difficulty with which any reforming administration
must bear: that the generalized approval of the silent majority is no
match for the chorus of disapproval from the organized minority. The
left-wing municipal socialists and their subsidized front organizations
were astute campaigners, trained and adept at exploiting every
weakness of presentation of the Government’s case. Much of the
manifesto promised ‘more of the same’ — not the most inspiring of
cries, although there is no doubt that a lot more was needed. We had
not yet cut taxes anything like as much as we wished. There was more
work to be done on trade union law and the privatization programme
— which would perhaps constitute the really big advance of this
Parliament — was barely under way; the bill to privatize British
Telecom, which had fallen with the election, had to be reintroduced.
The second problem was one for which we could not be blamed —
that there was still too much socialism in Britain. The fortunes of
socialism do not depend on those of the Labour Party: in fact, in the
long run it would be truer to say that Labour’ fortunes depend on
those of socialism. And socialism was still built into the institutions
and mentality of Britain. We had sold thousands of council homes; but

29 per cent of the housing stock remained in the public sector. We had
increased parent’ rights in the education system; but the ethos in
classrooms and teacher’ training colleges remained stubbornly left
wing. We had grappled with the problem of bringing more efficiency
into local government; but the Left’ redoubts in the great cities still
went virtually unchallenged. We had cut back trade union power; but
still almost 50 per cent of the workforce in employment was
unionized, far more than our main competitors, and of them around 4
million were working in a union closed shop. Moreover, as the miner’
strike would shortly demonstrate, the grip of the hard Left on union
power was still unbroken. We had won a great victory in the Falklands
War, reversing the years in which British influence seemed doomed to
an inexorable retreat; but there was still a sour envy of American
power and sometimes a deeper anti-Americanism, shared by too many
across the political spectrum.
In all this, my problem was simple. There was a revolution still to be
made, but too few revolutionaries. The appointment of the first
Cabinet in the new Parliament, which took place incongruously to the
background accompaniment of traditional military music and the
Trooping of the Colour, seemed a chance to recruit some.
THE NEW GOVERNMENT
I began by dropping one would-be pilot, whose sense of direction had
on several occasions proved faulty. In following Peter Carrington with
Francis Pym as Foreign Secretary I had exchanged an amusing Whig
for a gloomy one. Even the prospect of a landslide during the election
made him utter dire warnings. Francis and I disagreed on the direction
of policy, in our approach to government and indeed about life in
general. But he was liked in the House of Commons which always
warms to a minister who is believed to be out of step with the
Government,something which is often mistaken for independence of
mind. I hoped he would consent to become Speaker and I still believe
that he would have done the job well. (In fact, I am not at all clear
that we would have been able to ensure Francis got the job for it is, of
course, a decision for the House itself.) But in any case he was having
none of it. He preferred to go to the back-benches where he was a not
very effective critic of the Government.
I also asked David Howell and Janet Young to leave the Cabinet.
David Howell’ shortcomings as an administrator had been exposed
when he was at Energy and nothing I saw of his performance at
Transport suggested to me that my judgement of him was wrong. He
had the detached critical faculty which is excellent in Opposition or in
the Chairman of a Select Committee, but he lacked the mixture of
creative political imagination and practical drive to be a first-class
Cabinet minister. I asked Janet Young to make way for Willie
Whitelaw as Leader of the Lords. She was very well liked by their

lordships, but had turned out not to have the presence to lead the
Lords effectively and she was perhaps too consistent an advocate of
caution on all occasions. She stayed on in the Government outside the
Cabinet as a Minister of State at the Foreign Office. I regretted the loss
of both David and Janet on personal grounds, for they had been close
to me in Opposition.
Willie Whitelaw clearly fitted the bill as Janet’ successor. Willie had
become, quite simply, indispensable to me in Cabinet. When it really
mattered I knew he would be by my side and because of his
background, personality and position in the Party he could sometimes
sway colleagues when I could not. Yet Willie had not had an easy time
as Home Secretary. In part, this is because Home Secretaries never do
have an easy time; it is sometimes said that they possess a unique
combination of responsibility without power, taking the blame for
matters ranging from breaches of royal security, to the misdemeanours
of police officers, prison break-outs and the occasional riot, when their
power to prevent them is indirect or nonexistent. But there was more
to it than that. Willie and I knew that we did not share the same
instincts on Home Office matters. I believe that capital punishment for
the worst murders is morally right as retribution and practically
necessary as a deterrent: Willie does not. My views on sentencing in
general and on immigration are a good deal tougher than his. And,
flatteringly but often awkwardly, the great majority of the
Conservative Party and the British public agreed with me and showed
it regularly at our Party Conferences.
I chose Leon Brittan to be Willie’ successor at the Home Office.I
never appointed a Home Secretary who shared all my instincts on
these matters, but I thought that at least Leon would bring a keen
lawyer’ mind and intellectual rigour to the job. He would have no time
for the false sentimentality which surrounds so much discussion of the
causes of crime. From the Treasury he brought with him a welldeserved reputation as a good administrator who worked hard. Leon
was the best Chief Secretary to the Treasury during my premiership.
His was a powerful mind and I thought he should be given his chance.
With hindsight, I think that I should have promoted him to head
another department first. He needed the experience of running his own
ministry before moving to one of the three great offices of state. Too
rapid promotion can jeopardize politician’ long-term future. It turns
press and colleagues against them; they become touchy and uncertain
about their standing; and all this makes them vulnerable. Leon
suffered in this way, but he also had great strengths. For example, he
proved extremely capable in devising the package of measures to
tighten up the sentencing of violent criminals which we introduced
after the rejection of capital punishment by the House of Commons on
a free vote in July. He was to prove tough and competent during the
miner’ strike in 1984–5. Yet there were also weaknesses, which had
nothing to do with the circumstances of his appointment. Like other

brilliant lawyers I have known, he was better at mastering and
expounding a brief than in drawing up his own. Moreover, everybody
complained about his manner on television, which seemed aloof and
uncomfortable. Of course, there have been plenty of complaints over
the years about my manner too, so I had a good deal of sympathy with
him. But that did not change the situation, particularly since I was
shortly to lose from my Cabinet a really gifted presenter of policy.
I made Nigel Lawson Chancellor of the Exchequer — an enormous
and to most people unexpected promotion. Whatever quarrels we were
to have later, if it comes to drawing up a list of Conservative — even
Thatcherite — revolutionaries I would never deny Nigel a leading
place on it. He has many qualities which I admire and some which I do
not. He is imaginative, fearless and — on paper at least — eloquently
persuasive. His mind is quick and, unlike Geoffrey Howe whom he
succeeded as Chancellor, he makes decisions easily. His first budget
speech shows what good reading economics can make. Nigel was, I
knew, a genuinely creative economic thinker. Unlike creative
accountancy, creative economics is a rare and valuable thing. I doubt
whether any other Financial Secretary to the Treasury could have
come up with the inspired clarity of the Medium Term Financial
Strategy, which guided our economic policy until Nigel himself turned
his back on it in later years. As Chancellor, Nigel’ tax reforms had the
same quality about them — a simplicity which makes everyone ask
why no one thought to do this before.
Nigel was well aware of his own virtues. In January 1981 when I
had appointed Leon Brittan as Chief Secretary to the Treasury over
Nigel’ head, at Geoffrey Howe’ request, Nigel came to see me to
complain: he felt slighted and was evidently cross. But I told him that
his time for promotion would come and I would see that it did. Later
as Secretary of State for Energy he showed that among his other
qualities he was a first-class administrator. So I had by now come to
share Nigel’ high opinion of himself. And for most of the 1983
Parliament I had no cause to revise that judgement; on most issues I
never revised it.
But what to do with Geoffrey Howe? The time had come to move
Geoffrey on. Four gruelling years in the Treasury was enough and it
seems a kind of psychological law that Chancellors naturally incline
towards the Foreign Office. Partly this is simply because that is the
next logical step. But it is also because international finance is
nowadays so important that Chancellors have to take a keen interest in
the IMF, the G7 and the European Community and so the longing to
tread the world stage naturally takes hold of them. I wanted to
promote Geoffrey as a reward for all he had done. But I had doubts
about his suitability for the Foreign Office. And, in retrospect, I was
right. Geoffrey was, indeed, very good at the business of negotiation of
a text line by line, for which his training as a lawyer and his
experience at the Treasury fitted him. He was a perfect right-hand man

for the European Councils I attended. But he fell under the spell of the
Foreign Office where compromise and negotiation were ends in
themselves. This magnified his faults and smothered his virtues. In his
new department he fell into the habits which the Foreign Office seems
to cultivate — a reluctance to subordinate diplomatic tactics to the
national interest and an insatiable appetite for nuances and conditions
which can blur the clearest vision. In the end Geoffrey’ vision became
finding a form of words. To the extent that Geoffrey did have a cause
to guide him in foreign affairs it was one on which the two of us were
far apart, though I did not give this much thought at the time. For
Geoffrey harboured an almost romantic longing for Britain to become
part of some grandiose European consensus. I never heard him define
this misty Europeanism, even in the last turbulent days of my
Premiership, but it was for him a touchstone (along with liberal views
on Home Office matters) of highmindedness and civilized values. It
was to bring us all no end of trouble.
My first choice for the job of Foreign Secretary had been Cecil
Parkinson. He and I agreed on economic and domestic policy. Neither
of us had the slightest doubt that Britain’ interests must come first in
foreign policy. He had served in the Falklands War Cabinet. He had
just masterminded the most technically proficient general election
campaign I have known. He seemed to me right for this most senior
job.
However, my hopes were disappointed. In the early evening on
election day after I had returned from my own constituency Cecil
visited me in Downing Street and told me that he had been having an
affair with his former secretary, Sara Keays. This gave me pause. But I
did not immediately decide that it was an insuperable obstacle to his
becoming Foreign Secretary. I was still thinking about the election.
Indeed, I marvelled that with all this on his mind he had run such a
magnificent campaign. I was even relieved that he had spared me the
concern and distraction that it would cause at such a time. But the
following day, shortly before Cecil was due for lunch at No. 10, I
received a personal letter from Sara Keays’ father. It revealed that she
was pregnant with Cecil’ child. When Cecil arrived I showed him the
letter. It must have been one of the worst moments of his life.
It was immediately obvious that I could not send Cecil to the
Foreign Office with such a cloud hanging over him. I urged him to
discuss the personal questions with his family. Meanwhile I decided to
make him Secretary of State for the newly combined Departments of
Trade and Industry. It was a job I knew he would do well — and it was
a less senior and less sensitive post than Foreign Secretary would have
been.
In September I appointed John Gummer to succeed Cecil as Party
Chairman (I would have appointed a new Chairman sooner or later in
any case). John had been a Vice-Chairman of the Party under Ted
Heath and so knew Central Office well. He is also a gifted speaker and

writer. Nor was there any need for a leading minister, let alone a
politician of Cecil’ stature, to be Chairman immediately after an
election. Unfortunately, John Gummer was not a born administrator
and when we ran into political trouble he did not carry the weight to
help us get out of it.
An appointment that strengthened the Party, however, was that of
John Wakeham who became Chief Whip. John would probably not
dissent from his reputation as a ‘fixer’. He was on the right of the
Party, a highly competent accountant, who had tried to make sense for
me of British Leyland’ elliptical accounts. He had a manner which
exuded self-confidence, a good deal of which was deserved. These
talents made him a highly effective party manager.

Within months I had to make further important changes. At the
beginning of October Cecil Parkinson, with the agreement of Sara
Keays, issued a statement to the press revealing their affair and the
fact that she was pregnant. I wanted if possible to keep Cecil — a
political ally, an able minister and a friend. At first, it seemed that I
might succeed. There was no great pressure from within the Party for
him to go: on the whole his colleagues in government and on the backbenches were supportive. The Party Conference took place the week
after Cecil’ statement and his ministerial speech was well received.
However, very late on Thursday evening, as I was completing my own
speech for the following day, the Press Office at No. 10 rang my hotel
suite. They told my private secretary that Sara Keays had given an
interview to The Times and that the story dominated Friday’ front
page. I called a meeting immediately, with Willie Whitelaw, John
Gummer and Cecil himself. It was clear that the story was not going to
die down and, though I asked Cecil to hold back from resigning that
evening, we all knew that he would have to go.
Early next morning Cecil came in to see me and said that he and
Ann had decided that he should resign. There was only one problem.
He had a public engagement to open the new Blackpool Heliport and
to unveil a commemorative plaque. Clearly, it was impossible for him
to go ahead with this. Denis stepped into the breach and unveiled the
plaque, which poignantly had Cecil’ name on it.
Thankfully, this did not mean the end of Cecil’ political career. But
he had to endure four years in the political wilderness and lost
whatever chance he might have had of climbing to the very top of the
political ladder.
In everything but the short term, Cecil’ resignation weakened the
Government. He had proved an effective minister and, though he was
only at the DTI a short time, had made a big impact, particularly on
the City of London. It was Cecil who took the difficult but correct
decision to introduce legislation to exclude the Stock Exchange from
the operation of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act and so to terminate
the court case which had been brought against it by the DirectorGeneral of Fair Trading. In return the Stock Exchange made a

commitment to dismantle long-standing restrictions on trading and the
process was begun that led to the Financial Services Act (1986) and
the ‘Big Bang’ in October of that year. These reforms allowed the City
to adapt to the highly competitive international markets in which it
now operates and have been crucial to its continued success.
I asked Norman Tebbit to move from Employment to take over the
DTI and shifted Tom King from Transport as Norman’ replacement.
This enabled me to bring Nick Ridley into the Cabinet, as Transport
Secretary. Nick’ arrival in Cabinet was a silver lining to the cloud that
hung over us following Cecil’ departure. Like Keith Joseph, Nick was
someone who wanted office in order to do what he believed was right.
Although in my experience there are few politicians for whom doing
the right thing is of no importance, there are fewer still for whom it is
the only consideration. Nick and Keith were among them. Nick
provided the Government (and me in particular) not only with a clear
vision but also with technical solutions to policy problems. At
Transport he pressed ahead with privatization and deregulation. And
in the later years of the Government he was someone I could rely upon
for complete loyalty and honest dealing. Indeed, it was an excess of
honesty that ultimately brought him down. (The American journalist,
Michael Kinsley, has defined a ‘gaffe’ as telling an inconvenient truth. I
have to say that my own experience bears out the accuracy of his
definition.)
Such was the team on which the success of the Government’ second
term depended. I hoped that they would share the zeal and enthusiasm
of their captain.
THE STUTTGART EUROPEAN COUNCIL
At the end of the week in which I formed the new Government I flew
to Stuttgart for the postponed European Council, which was chaired by
Chancellor Kohl. We had not ourselves asked for the postponement of
the Council, which had originally been planned for 6–7 June, but once
the proposal was made we welcomed it since it allowed more time to
campaign. Probably our European partners thought that they might
extract a few more concessions from a newly re-elected government
than from one under the domestic pressures that elections pose.
The main issue at Stuttgart would, as usual, be money — ‘our
money’ in particular — though I was discreet enough on this occasion
not to use the phrase. I had to ensure a satisfactory refund for Britain
in 1983 and to make as much progress as possible towards a long-term
solution that would continue to cut our net contributions to the
Community. This involved achieving long-term reform of the
Community’ finances.
Had I had to argue my case on grounds of equity alone I would have
been far from sanguine about the likely outcome. But by now the

Community was on the edge of bankruptcy: the exhaustion of its ‘own
resources’ was only months away and it was possible to increase them
only by agreement of all the member states to raise the 1 per cent VAT
‘ceiling’. This had the effect attributed by Dr Johnson to the imminent
prospect of the gallows: the minds of our European partners were
beginning to concentrate wonderfully. The requirement of unanimity
gave me a strong hand and they knew that I was not the person to
underplay it. Of course, it would have been perfectly possible for the
Community to live within the discipline imposed by the 1 per cent
ceiling, if it had had the will to cut out the waste, inefficiency and
plain corruption in its own programmes: after all, VAT revenues are
remarkably buoyant. But I knew full well that the will was lacking and
that profligacy and that particular degree of irresponsibility which is
bred by unaccountable bureaucracy would continue for as long as
difficult decisions could be postponed.
It was clear that West Germany’ attitude would be crucial. The
Germans were the Community’ largest net contributors. Admittedly,
West German farmers enjoyed the benefits of the extravagant Common
Agricultural Policy, but at a certain point the interests of the West
German taxpayer would become paramount. The Germans followed
our lead in opposing an increase in ‘own resources’ until the
Community’ finances had been put on a sounder footing. But we had
some suspicions that they would waver when the pressure mounted.
They also resented — and I do not blame them — having to contribute
towards the funding of the British rebate which I had won. But my
answer to that, of course, was to urge them to exercise leadership to
sort out the fundamental imbalance of the Community’ finances once
and for all. Chancellor Kohl was not usually the most energetic of
Council participants unless some German domestic issue was directly
involved, but I knew that he would want to make a success of the
Stuttgart Council to crown his first European presidency. I hoped that
this and the other circumstances I have described would work in
favour of an outcome I could accept.
The Council decided to leave negotiations on the future financing of
the Community to the Foreign and Finance ministers, initially at least;
they would report to the next full Council in December. The
Commission had already produced its own proposals, some of which
we favoured and others we did not. A refund was agreed for Britain to
cover the year 1983. But the real decisions were postponed for another
six months — six months nearer the time when the Community would
find itself broke.
I was not disappointed with this outcome and I subsequently took
every opportunity to praise Chancellor Kohl’ handling of the Council.
The results were rather better for Britain than they first appeared. The
1983 refund was less than we might have hoped. But when you took
the four years to 1983 together we had obtained a refund of about
two-thirds of our unadjusted net contribution, which was the goal we

had publicly set ourselves. Considering the strong opposition we met
from France, I felt that was a useful achievement. There was some
speculation in the British newspapers that I had weakened the British
position as regards the increase in the VAT ‘ceiling’, but this was only
a negotiating ploy and a close reading of the communiqué — as well
as any reading of my own mind — would demonstrate that I had done
no such thing. (This was, indeed, to become very publicly apparent
before the end of the year.)
There was one other aspect of the Stuttgart Council. The Council
issued what was called — in the grandiloquent language which had
been used about this subject since before we joined — a ‘Solemn
Declaration on European Union’. I took the view that I could not
quarrel with everything, and the document had no legal force. So I
went along with it.
When I was questioned later about the declaration in the House of
Commons, I replied: ‘I must make it quite clear that I do not in any
way believe in a federated Europe. Nor does that document. ‘Certainly
it did not transfer powers to a centralized Europe in the way that the
Maastricht Treaty was to do. But the high-flown language of the
declaration has become familiar from later developments: the
linguistic skeleton on which so much institutional flesh would grow
was already visible.
THE ECONOMY
It sometimes happens in politics that relatively small matters, with no
obvious connection between them, combine to create a political
atmosphere in which the Government seems to do nothing right. I
have suggested earlier some underlying reasons why such an
atmosphere developed at the start of our second term. But there were
other problems. There continued to be misunderstanding and
resentment of the new system by which the retirement pension was
uprated in line with inflation. Many of our best supporters were angry
that proposals to reintroduce capital punishment were thrown out on a
free vote by a Conservative-dominated House of Commons, some of
whose members had undoubtedly dissembled their views (or worse) to
those who had selected them. Also, shortly afterwards Members of
Parliament decided to vote themselves a pay rise considerably greater
than the Government had recommended, at a time when
unemployment was rising and many people could expect little or no
increase.
But this malaise would have had little importance had it not been
for the economy. The underlying economy was sound: indeed, as we
pressed ahead with further structural changes, especially privatization,
it would steadily become sounder still. When I spoke in the House of
Commons on 22 June 1983, introducing the Queen’ Speech, I could
point to the lowest rate of inflation since 1968, to higher output and to

record levels of productivity. But part of the trouble was that after an
election a government’ past achievements are immediately discounted.
As one of my advisers put it, paraphrasing La Rochefoucauld: ‘the only
gratitude in politics is for favours still to be received.’ And we had
been so lucky in choosing the date of the election (though it was not
all luck) that expectations about the rate of future progress had risen
too high. Inflation started to move up from the low point of 3.7 per
cent in May and June to reach 5.3 per cent in December, though it
would stay at that level or lower for the next twelve months.
Unemployment also began to rise again, remaining above three
million, and it seemed very difficult to predict when the higher
economic growth which was now apparent would begin to bring the
total down. Although the interest rate actually fell, mortgage rates rose
to meet the extra demand for mortgages — in itself a sign of the
progress we were making towards a property-owning democracy, but
naturally unpopular with borrowers. All this led to accusations that
the Government had ‘cooked the books’ on the economy before the
election.
It was public spending which became the focus of this attack.
Indeed, there had been tell-tale signs of trouble in the weeks before
the election. In April, the first month of the new financial year, the
PSBR was well above target and it soon became clear that the
provisional outturn for the PSBR for 1982–3 – a figure we regularly
published — would be £9.2 billion, £1.7 billion higher than the budget
estimate. It was possible that lower than expected revenues were part
of the problem. But there had been an earlier misjudgement about the
extent to which cash limits would be underspent, and much of the
problem arose from the action we took to correct this. The previous
winter we had had such strong evidence that capital programmes were
being underspent that we had taken positive action to encourage
spending up to target. (In principle, it is right to spend up to planned
levels, otherwise you pile up spending for future years, damage the
construction industry and increase unemployment.)
I had discussed the problem with the then Chancellor, Geoffrey
Howe, on Thursday 21 April. As so often, it seemed that the Ministry
of Defence had been the main villain. The last instruction from the
Treasury to the MoD before the budget had been to minimize their
underspending. The MoD had complied with unwonted energy. Having
been predicting a substantial underspend, they turned out to be
overspending with a vengeance. Geoffrey and I were appalled and
decided to give the MoD a much-needed rebuke. But the damage had
been done.
After the election the new Chancellor had another look at the
borrowing figures. Nigel Lawson found himself in an unenviable
position. The Treasury’ summer forecast had just been completed and
it suggested that the PSBR for the current financial year would be
overrun by &3 billion. Inevitably there was a large margin of error in

these figures — as always with the PSBR which is constituted by the
difference between two enormous sums of money, public sector
income and expenditure. But the signs were bad. To add to the
problem, the money supply figures for May were poor and we knew
that sterling, though high at the time, might soon come under pressure
if American interest rates kept on rising. In any case, if we were really
on course for a huge overshoot in the PSBR, something had to be done.
When on Wednesday 29 June I received a note from Nigel setting
out how he wished to act I too became distinctly worried and emerged
no less so from the discussion I had with him the following evening. It
is never an easy matter to rein back public spending part way through
a fiscal year, but the argument for early action was overwhelming. The
earlier you make a cut the less drastic it has to be and the more chance
you have of sustaining your credibility with the markets, which is a
useful bonus. The obverse of this, however, was that to announce
further public expenditure cuts just weeks into a new Parliament
would be extremely unpopular and politically embarrassing. The
public would think that we had deceived them at the election and
spending ministers would feel bounced. Nigel fully understood this
and it was a mark of his courage that he recommended immediate
action.
He made three proposals. The first was to raise more money for the
Government by selling an extra tranche of BP shares. But while this
might help fund the PSBR it did not allow escape from the need for
real cuts in spending. It was not possible to take action on the noncash-limited programmes in mid-year, so that we had to concentrate
on cash-limited spending. But should the cash squeeze apply to all of
this spending or just some of it? Nigel’ initial view was that it should
only apply to the non-pay element of central government spending
because pay was extremely difficult to hold down successfully. My
advisers and I queried this and after Nigel and I talked the matter
through at Chequers the following Saturday we settled on a package
that included the pay bill within the squeeze. Alan Walters shared
Nigel’ view that immediate action had to be taken and urged a 3 per
cent reduction in cash limits, greater than Nigel originally proposed. In
fact, we settled on a 1 per cent reduction in the pay bill and a 2 per
cent reduction in other cash limits.
Nigel had one further ingenious proposal, originally suggested by
Leon Brittan earlier in the year: the introduction of ‘end-year
flexibility’. By Treasury convention, departments which failed to spend
up to their allocation during the financial year were not allowed to
carry over the unspent sum into the following year; they lost the
money, in effect. The result, of course, was that departments which
found themselves underspending as the end of the financial year
approached tended to put on a spurt to use up their allocation and
public spending would surge. ‘End-year flexibility ‘sought to diminish
this effect by permitting them to carry over a proportion of that

underspending into the next year.
Altogether these proposals for asset sales, public spending cuts and
an improvement in the technique of public expenditure control would,
we believed, reduce that year’ public expenditure by more than &1
billion.
Nigel and I expected trouble at Cabinet. It would have been helpful
if we could have briefed ministers in advance, but we knew that if
papers were circulated the proposals would probably leak. In the end
some ministers were briefed individually, as were the Permanent
Secretaries of their Departments, but despite our precautions when
Cabinet met on Thursday 7 July to discuss the proposals, they had
already appeared in print, splashed across the front pages that
morning. This did not make the meeting any easier. But Cabinet faced
up to what had to be done and Nigel was able to announce the
decisions to the House of Commons that afternoon. We emphasized
that these were not cuts in planned public spending but rather a
package of savings necessary to remain within it. It was perhaps too
much to hope that this distinction would be widely grasped.
DIPLOMACY: VISITS TO THE NETHERLANDS, WEST GERMANY,
CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES
I spent most of August on holiday in Switzerland, getting over an
awkward and painful eye operation that I had had at the beginning of
the month. On Friday 29 July I had been at the passing out parade at
the RAF College at Cranwell. When the parade and the fly-past were
over I turned and walked up some steps into the College for lunch. All
of a sudden something happened to my right eye: black spots floated
across the field of vision. I rubbed, but they wouldn’t go away. Later
when I was back at Chequers I bathed the eye. But it did not improve.
On Sunday I rang my doctor. I went over to his house, not far from
Chequers, and he examined the eye — having heard my description of
what had happened he already had an eye specialist there. He told me
that he thought I had a torn and detached retina and suggested laser
treatment, followed by two days lying down until we could be sure
that it had worked. Lying still for very long was something I found
difficult, but I filled part of the time enjoyably enough listening to
novels on tape. On Wednesday I went to his surgery to receive the
verdict. I had packed an overnight case, as an insurance policy, halfthinking that I would not need it. But the news was bad. He examined
me again and said that there had been no improvement at all; if
anything, my eye was worse. As a precaution he had already booked
an operating theatre for later that day and I went straight to hospital
where the operation was successfully performed.
By the time I returned to England from my Swiss holiday I felt fully
recovered, which was all to the good since I had to make several

important foreign visits in September.
The first of these was to the Netherlands and West Germany. The
two issues which dominated my talks in both countries were the
deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles and the approaching
European Council in Athens, which was due to be held in December.
On Monday 19 September I arrived in the Netherlands to be met by
the Dutch Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers. I liked Mr Lubbers, a young
practical businessman who now applied his talents to good effect in
Dutch politics. Although his instincts were federalist, like the leaders
of other small countries in the European Community, in day-to-day
Community business we often found ourselves on the same side. This
was very much a short working visit with no formal speeches. Over
lunch, I discussed the general political scene with Mr Lubbers and his
Foreign minister, Hans Van Den Broek — another Dutchman whose
company and conversation I enjoyed, even when I did not agree with
him. The Dutch Government, being a coalition, was in its usual
somewhat fragile condition, with problems over its budget and in the
background the question of nuclear arms exercising a general
destabilizing influence.
The summit’ plenary session in the afternoon was entirely devoted
to European Community matters. There was a large measure of
agreement between us on the fundamental practical questions, but the
Dutch urged compromise in the run-up to Athens and I was not going
to give the impression that our stance was weakening. We seemed to
be getting nowhere in our campaign for a tough guideline on future
CAP expenditure. Moreover, I was concerned that the Community
should not drift further into protectionism. As regards the future
financing of the Community, there was no question of my agreeing at
Athens to an increase in the Community’ ‘own resources’ in isolation
from the other essential conditions we had laid down. I also sought to
draw Dutch attention to something which is still not properly grasped:
if the Community expected the Germans to go on paying an openended share of its costs this would store up political trouble for the
future. He who paid the piper would eventually wish to call the tune.
From the Netherlands I flew on to West Germany, where I visited
British forces. On Wednesday afternoon (21 September) I arrived in
Bonn for talks and dinner with Chancellor Kohl. He and I discussed the
approach to the Athens summit. I told him that it would be deplorable
if the impetus he had given to reform at Stuttgart were now lost. So I
was relieved when Herr Kohl said that sorting out the CAP and the
system of financing the Community must take priority over new
policies. He also told me that the European Community was ‘politically
essential to Germany’ but it was ‘no good having the Community as a
roof over Germany if the roof was leaking’ — an interesting metaphor,
I thought; and anyone dealing with the European Community should
pay careful attention to metaphors. We in Britain were inclined to
minimize their significance — whether about ‘roofs’ or ‘trains’ — and

to concentrate on the practicalities — mending the leaking roof, in
Chancellor Kohl’ phrase. We had to learn the hard way that by
agreement to what were apparently empty generalizations or vague
aspirations we were later held to have committed ourselves to political
structures which were contrary to our interests. But this is to
anticipate a little.
However, I was already beginning to feel — I did so increasingly as
the years went by — that there was an imbalance in western
diplomacy. European Community heads of government and ministers
met regularly, drawn together initially by Community problems, but at
the same time discussing wider international issues. By contrast, there
was not enough contact and understanding between the European
countries and our transatlantic allies in NATO — the United States and
Canada. I hoped that my visit to Canada and the United States at the
end of September would do something to put this right.
The Canadian visit was, in fact, made on their initiative. The
sensitive question of the patriation of the Canadian Constitution from
the Westminster Parliament was now behind us.* My visit was an
opportunity to emphasize the value of trade and investment links and,
still more important, to try to persuade Canadians to take a larger and
more vigorous part in the western alliance than they had under their
present Prime Minister, Pierre Trudeau. It was common knowledge
that Pierre Trudeau and his Liberal Government — who sometimes
seemed more interested in the politics of the Third World than in the
great East-West issues — were extremely unpopular. But I would also
be meeting the Conservative prime ministers of the provinces of
Ontario and Alberta, as well as the new Conservative leader at federal
level, Brian Mulroney, who had just been elected to the Canadian
Parliament and who was firm favourite to replace Pierre Trudeau as
Prime Minister at the next election.

I flew into Ottawa on the evening of Sunday 25 September and had
supper at the High Commission, one of the great historic buildings in
Ottawa. Two of the paragraphs of the speech I was to deliver the
following day to the Canadian House of Commons were in French and
a French teacher had been specially laid on when I arrived so that I
could get my pronunciation just right and avoid international
incidents.
The following morning I had talks with Pierre Trudeau and his
Cabinet. East-West issues provided the main point of contention, as I
had thought they would. Mr Trudeau’ line was that technicians had
taken over arms control negotiations from the politicians, and that this
was why they were getting nowhere. I did not agree. After all,
disarmament talks were bound to be highly technical: if we got the
technicalities wrong we would be in trouble. However, Mr Trudeau
developed his theme, arguing that the shooting down of the South
Korean Airliner by the Soviets — with the loss of Canadian lives — on
1 September also demonstrated the dangers when politicians were not

in command. He understood that the aircraft had been shot down on
the orders of a local military commander without reference to
Moscow. I replied that what this really showed was that the Soviet
command structure and rules of engagement were unsound, because
these should not have allowed an aircraft to be shot down without
political direction. What liberal leftists like him seemed unable to
grasp was that such acts of brutality as the shooting down of a civilian
aircraft were by no means uncharacteristic of the communist system
itself.
Later that morning I had a private meeting with Mr Trudeau. We
discussed international affairs — Hong Kong, China, Belize — but
most interesting for me was his impression of Mikhail Gorbachev, of
whom I had heard but whom I did not yet know. Mr Gorbachev had
visited Canada earlier in the year, under the pretext of examining
Canada’ agricultural achievements but really with a view to discussing
long term security questions. Pierre Trudeau had found him sticking to
the conventional line as regards the INF negotiations, but without the
blinkered hostility which characterized the other Soviet leaders. Mr
Gorbachev had apparently been prepared to argue and make at least
verbal concessions. I did not at this time foresee the importance of Mr
Gorbachev for the future. The conversation served mainly to confirm
my view that we must persuade the new Soviet leader, Yuri Andropov,
to visit the West. How were we to make a proper assessment of the
Soviet leaders if we did not have personal contact with them? Still
more important, how were we to persuade them to see further than
their own propaganda if we never showed them what the West was
really like?
After lunch I had my first meeting with Brian Mulroney. Mr
Mulroney was undergoing that most misleading of experiences — a
political honeymoon. He was charming and charismatic but he lacked
any real political experience. It was to his credit that he fully realized
this and at his request I spent most of our time talking about my own
experience of Opposition and government. Brian Mulroney and I were
to become good friends, though we were very different sorts of
politician and were to have some serious disagreements. As Leader of
the Progressive Conservatives I thought he put too much stress on the
adjective as opposed to the noun.
The speech I delivered to the Canadian Parliament that afternoon
went very well. It was a more powerful defence of values and
principles than they were used to hearing from their own Government
and was interrupted by frequent applause. Apart from one or two MPs,
I received a standing ovation which included members of the
Diplomatic Corps. This itself provided an interesting vignette of
attitudes behind the Iron Curtain: the Soviet, Czech and Bulgarian
Ambassadors remained rooted to their seats, while the Hungarian and
the Pole rose enthusiastically to join the applause.

That evening a dinner was given for me by Mr Trudeau in Toronto.
A problem I was to find throughout this visit first surfaced acutely on
this occasion. The dinner was preceded by a walkabout through a
large crowd of Liberal Party supporters and the guests at the dinner
itself seemed similarly partisan, though very welcoming. Although it
was polite and friendly, Mr Trudeau’ speech emphasized the political
differences between us. As he spoke, I took notes and used these as the
basis of my off-the-cuff reply which took the form of a forthright
defence of free enterprise. This brought cheers from the back of the
hall though, as one of my party remarked, whether these came from
Conservatives who had infiltrated the gathering or from Liberals who
had been converted was unclear.

From Canada I flew to Washington for a meeting with President
Reagan. Overall, the President’ domestic political position was strong.
In spite of the difficulties which the US budget deficit was causing, the
American economy was in remarkably good shape. It was growing
faster with markedly less inflation than when he came into office and
there was widespread appreciation of this. As he himself used to say:
‘now that it is working, how come they don’t call it Reaganomics any
more?’ The President had also set his imprint on East-West relations.
The Soviets were now definitely on the defensive in international
relations. They were the ones who would have to decide how to react
to the forthcoming deployment by NATO of intermediate-range
nuclear weapons. And they were in the dock as a result of the shooting
down of the Korean Airliner. In Central America the Government of El
Salvador which the United States had been backing against communist
insurgency was looking stronger. Perhaps only in the Middle East had
the Administration’ policy not proved even a qualified success. ArabIsraeli peace talks were unlikely to be resumed and there was a
growing danger of the US and its allies becoming irrevocably sucked
into the turbulent politics of the Lebanon. The President had yet to
announce whether he would stand for a second term, but I thought
and hoped that he would and it looked as if he would win.
Our discussion that morning and over the lunch which followed
covered a wide canvas. The President was optimistic about events in
Central America. As he put it, El Salvador had not been in the news for
a long time — because the Government there was winning and so the
American media were deprived of their nightly stories told from the
viewpoint of the guerillas. I raised the question of the US resuming the
supply of arms to Argentina, telling him that a decision to do this
would simply not be understood in Britain. The President said that he
was aware of that, but there would be great pressure for the
resumption of arms supplies if a civilian regime were established in
Buenos Aires.
I also took the opportunity to explain our opposition, which hitherto
the Americans had always supported, to the inclusion of the British
and French independent nuclear deterrents in the arms talks between

the United States and the Soviet Union. The Soviet insistence on the
inclusion of our deterrents was simply a device to divert attention
from the American proposal for deep reductions in strategic nuclear
weapons. From the point of view of Britain, our deterrent constituted
an irreducible minimum, but it was only 2.5 per cent of the Soviet
strategic arsenal. I repeated what I had told the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee that morning: the inclusion of the British
deterrent would logically mean that the United States could not have
parity with the Soviet Union. Would that really be acceptable to the
United States? Or if, say, the French decided to increase their nuclear
weapons, would the United States really be prepared to cut its by an
equivalent amount? The President seemed to take my point, which I
found reassuring. I for my part was able to reassure him as regards the
timetable for deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles in Europe.
He had been concerned to learn that the crucial debate on this matter
in the Bundestag had been delayed. He had no doubt about the
firmness of Chancellor Kohl but he was not so sure about some of
those around him. He was convinced that the whole Soviet strategy
was still aimed at preventing deployment. I said that he should be in
no doubt that Britain would deploy the intermediate-range nuclear
missiles as planned, and I believed that West Germany would do the
same.
However, our discussion turned on the strategy we should pursue
towards the Soviet Union generally over the years ahead. I had been
giving a good deal of thought to this matter and had discussed it with
the experts at a Chequers seminar.* I began by saying that we had to
make the most accurate assessment of the Soviet system and the Soviet
leadership — there was plenty of evidence available about both
subjects — so as to establish a realistic relationship: whatever we
thought of them, we all had to live on the same planet. I congratulated
the President on his speech to the UN General Assembly after the
shooting down of the Korean Airliner and said how right he was to
insist that despite this outrage the arms control negotiations in Geneva
should continue. The President agreed that now was not the time to
isolate ourselves from the Soviet Union. When the USSR failed to
prevent NATO’ INF deployment they might start to negotiate seriously.
Like me, he had clearly been considering the way in which we should
deal with the Soviets once that happened.
The President argued that there were two points on which we had to
form a judgement. First, the Russians seemed paranoid about their
own security: did they really feel threatened by the West or were they
merely trying to keep the offensive edge? The second question related
to the control of Soviet power itself. He had always assumed that in
the Soviet Union the Politburo controlled the military. But did the fact
that the first public comments on the Korean Airliner incident had
come from the military indicate that the Politburo was now dominated
by the generals? As regards negotiation with the Soviets, we should

never forget that the main reason why they were at the negotiating
table in Geneva at all was the build-up of American defences. They
would never be influenced by sweet reason. However, if they saw that
the United States had the will and the determination to build up its
defences as far as necessary, the Soviet attitude might change because
they knew they could not keep up the pace. He believed that the
Russians were now close to the limit in their expenditure on defence:
their internal economic difficulties were such that they could not
substantially increase the proportion of their resources devoted to the
military. The United States, on the other hand, had the capacity to
double its military output. The task was to convince Moscow that the
only way it could remain equal was by negotiations because they
could not afford to compete in weaponry for very much longer. The
President recalled a cartoon which had Mr Brezhnev saying to a
Russian general, ‘I liked the arms race better when we were the only
ones in it.’
Now that the Soviet system has crumbled along the lines he
envisaged, his words seem prophetic. It may be that one reason why
President Reagan and I made such a good team was that, although we
shared the same analysis of the way the world worked, we were very
different people. He had an accurate grasp of the strategic picture but
left the tactical detail to others. I was conscious that we must manage
our relations with the communists on a day-to-day basis in such a way
that events never got out of control. This was why throughout my
discussion with the President I kept on coming back to the need to
consider precisely how we should deal with the Soviets when they
faced up to reality and returned to the negotiating table in a more
reasonable frame of mind.
That evening I made a speech at a dinner held by the Winston
Churchill Foundation of the United States in which I set out my views
on these questions:
We have to deal with the Soviet Union. But we must deal with it not as we
would like it to be, but as it is. We live on the same planet and we have to go
on sharing it. We stand ready therefore, if and when the circumstances are
right, to talk to the Soviet leadership. But we must not fall into the trap of
projecting our own morality on to the Soviet leaders. They do not share our
aspirations; they are not constrained by our ethics; they have always
considered themselves exempt from the rules that bind other states.

I also had a slightly different message which I wanted those who did
not share all of President Reagan’ and my analysis to heed:
Does it need saying that the Soviet Union has nothing to fear from us? For
several years after the war the United States had a monopoly of nuclear
weapons, but it was a threat to no one. Democracies are naturally peaceloving. There is so much which our people wish to do with their lives, so
many uses for our resources other than military equipment. The use of force
and the threat of force to advance our beliefs are no part of our philosophy.

The speech was widely reported and generally well received in the
United States. But I was soon to feel, in the light of America’ response
to a political crisis in a small island in the Caribbean, that at least part
of the message had not been understood.
PROBLEMS IN THE TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONSHIP: LEBANON
AND GRENADA
Unexpectedly, the autumn of 1983 turned out to be a testing time for
Anglo-US relations. This was because we adopted different attitudes
towards crises in the Lebanon and in Grenada.

These events took place against the background of great strategic
decisions for the West. November 1983 was the time we had agreed
for the deployment of intermediate-range missiles in Britain and West
Germany: I had to ensure that nothing interfered with it. Doing so
depended to a large degree on demonstrating that the United States
could indeed be relied upon as a trustworthy ally.
I had wider objectives as well. I needed to ensure that whatever
short-term difficulties we had with the United States, the long-term
relationship between our two countries, on which I knew Britain’
security and the free West’ interests depended, would not be damaged.
I was equally determined that international law should be respected
and that relations between states should not be allowed to degenerate
into a game of realpolitik played out between contesting power blocs.
Britain had fought the Falklands War in defence of a principle of
international law — as well as to defend our people.
This is not the place to describe the full tragedy of the Lebanon.
That formerly prosperous and democratic state has been shattered by
civil war since the early 1970s and made to serve as the battleground
for the competing ambitions of Syrians, Palestinians, Islamic
fundamentalists, Israelis and local warlords.
Shortly before the end of the Falklands War Israel had launched a
full-scale invasion of Lebanon, which led in August 1982 to the
deployment of a mainly American Multi-National Force (MNF) in
Beirut. The MNF was withdrawn after a brief period but returned in
September following the massacres that took place in the Palestinian
refugee camps in the suburbs of Beirut which shocked the world. At
this point it consisted of American, French and Italian forces. The
Lebanese Government asked Britain to make a contribution too. I was
reluctant, and explained that in my view we were overextended as it
was. But they sent a special envoy to see me who told me that Britain
held a unique position and that it was vital that it be represented in
the Force. So I agreed, with the support of Michael Heseltine and
Geoffrey Howe, that about 100 of our men currently stationed in
Cyprus with the UN should join the MNF. In practice, the British
contingent had a slightly different role from the others, manning no

substantial fixed positions. The mandate of the MNF was to assist the
Lebanese Government and the Lebanese Armed Forces to restore their
authority over the Beirut area and so help to ensure the safety of the
population there.
I am always uneasy about any commitment of British forces if it is
made without very clear objectives. The original limited mandate of
the MNF was indeed clear, at least on paper. But later in September
we came under strong pressure from the Americans and the Italians to
increase our commitment and to extend the mandate. The doubt in
everyone’ mind was whether the current force would be sufficient to
allow the Lebanese Government and Army to restore their authority.
But if it was not sufficient, that fact was, of course, as much an
argument for withdrawing the MNF as for expanding it. I held a
meeting to discuss these matters with ministers and advisers at
Chequers on Friday 9 September. I was alarmed by reports that the US
seemed determined to take a much tougher line with the Syrians than
seemed sensible. Although Syria was certainly an obstacle to progress,
its support for any solution to the Lebanese crisis would be essential.
The military and political situation in the Lebanon was
deteriorating. In the Chouf mountains south of Beirut, the forces of the
Druze minority, historically friendly to Britain, were locked in a
conflict with the Lebanese Army which neither side seemed able to
win: it looked like a military stalemate. The Druze were under
pressure from their Syrian backers to secure wider objectives than they
themselves probably wanted. Certainly, they had no quarrel of their
own with the British and sought to avoid firing on our position. On
one occasion during a small lunch party at Downing Street I was told
that a Druze shell had fallen close to our troops. Michael Heseltine was
at the lunch, so I asked him to telephone the Druze leader, Walid
Jumblatt, to have the shelling stopped — and it was. Our force was
small, exposed and isolated, and I was becoming increasingly
concerned about what might happen.
For their part, the Lebanese Government and the Christian President
Amin Gemayel were unable to free themselves from their
identification with the old Phalange movement and so could not draw
on wider Lebanese support. As a result they had to lean increasingly
on the Americans. Three-quarters of the Lebanon was now occupied by
the Syrians or the Israelis and the prospects for peace and stability for
the remainder seemed bleak.
Then on Sunday 23 October a suicide bomber drove a lorry laden
with explosives into the basement of the US Marine headquarters in
Beirut. The building was totally destroyed. A second bomb shortly
afterwards did the same to the headquarters of the French
Paratroopers. Altogether 242 American and 58 French troops were
killed — in total more than Britain had lost in the Falklands War.
Responsibility was claimed by two militant Shia Muslim groups. My
immediate reaction was one of shock at the carnage and disgust at the

fanatics who had caused it. But I was also conscious of the impact it
would have on the position and morale of the MNF. On the one hand,
it would be wrong to give the terrorists the satisfaction of seeing the
international force driven out. On the other, what had happened
highlighted the enormous dangers of our continued presence and the
question arose about whether we were justified in continuing to risk
the lives of our troops for what was increasingly no clear purpose.
At this point my attention was abruptly diverted by events on the
other side of the world. The humiliation inflicted on the United States
by the Beirut bombing undoubtedly influenced its reaction to the
events which were taking place on the island of Grenada in the eastern
Caribbean.

On Wednesday 19 October 1983 a pro-Soviet military coup had
overthrown the Government of Grenada. The new regime were
certainly a vicious and unstable bunch. With the exception of General
Austin, who led the coup, they were all in their twenties and a number
of them had a record of violence and torture. Maurice Bishop, the
overthrown Prime Minister, and five of his close supporters were shot
dead. There was outrage at what had happened among most of the
other Caribbean countries. Jamaica and Barbados wanted military
intervention in which they would have liked the Americans and us to
take part. My immediate reaction was that it would be most unwise of
the Americans, let alone us, to accede to this suggestion. I was afraid
that it would put foreign communities in Grenada at severe risk. There
were some 200 British civilians there and many more Americans. The
main organization of Caribbean States, CARICOM, was not prepared to
agree to military intervention in Grenada. However, the Organization
of Eastern Caribbean States, the OECS, decided unanimously to put
together a force and called on other governments to help in restoring
peace and order in the island. Clearly, the American reaction would be
crucial.
It was easy to see why the United States might be tempted to go in
and deal with the thugs who had taken over in Grenada. But as I
always pointed out to the Americans afterwards, though apparently to
little effect, Grenada was not transformed from a democratic island
paradise into a Soviet surrogate overnight in October 1983. The
Marxist Maurice Bishop had already come to power there through an
earlier coup in March 1979: he had suspended the Constitution and
put many of his opponents in gaol. He was, indeed, a personal friend
of Fidel Castro. The Americans had had hostile relations with his
Government for years. Bishop was, admittedly, something of a
pragmatist and had even made a visit to the United States at the end
of May 1983. It seems that it was, in part, a dispute about the Grenada
Government’ attitude to private enterprise which brought about the
clash with his colleagues in the Marxist ‘New Jewel Movement’ that
ultimately led to his fall.

The new ‘hemispheric’ strategy which President Reagan’
Administration was pursuing, combined with experience of living
beside the Soviet satellite of Cuba, in our view led the United States to
exaggerate the threat which a Marxist Grenada posed. Our intelligence
suggested that the Soviets had only a peripheral interest in the island.
By contrast, the Government of Cuba certainly was deeply involved. A
new airfield was being constructed as an extension to the existing
airport. It was due to open in March 1984, though aircraft would be
able to land there from about January. The Americans saw this as
having a military purpose. It did indeed seem likely that the Cubans,
who were providing the workforce for the project — and an uncertain
number of Cuban military personnel also — regarded it in this light.
For them, it would be a way of managing more easily the traffic of
their thousands of troops in Angola and Ethiopia back and forth to
Cuba. It would also be useful if the Cubans wished to intervene closer
to home. But our view remained that the Grenada Government’ main
purpose was, as they claimed, a commercial one, planning to cater for
the undoubtedly exaggerated projections of their currently minimal
tourist industry. So the position on the eve of the overthrow of
Maurice Bishop was that Grenada had an unsavoury and undemocratic
regime with close and friendly relations with Cuba. On such an
analysis, the coup of 19 October 1983, morally objectionable as it was,
was a change in degree rather than in kind.
On Saturday 22 October — the day before the Beirut bomb outrages
— I received a report of the conclusions of the United States National
Security Council meeting about Grenada. I was told that it had been
decided that the Administration would proceed very cautiously. An
American carrier group based on the USS Independence, which had
been heading for the Mediterranean, had been diverted south to the
Caribbean; it was now east of the southern tip of Florida and due
north of Puerto Rico. An amphibious group with 1900 marines and
two landing craft was 200 miles further east. The Independence would
reach the area the following day but would remain well to the east of
Dominica and well to the north of Grenada. The amphibious group
would reach the same area later on the following day. The existence of
this force would give the Americans the option to react if the situation
warranted it. It was emphasized, however, that they had made no
decision going beyond these contingency deployments. They had
received a firm request from the east Caribbean heads of government
to help them restore peace and order in Grenada. Jamaica and
Barbados were supporting the request. If the Americans took action to
evacuate US citizens they promised to evacuate British citizens as well.
We were also assured that there would be consultation if they decided
to take any further steps.
That evening I spent a good deal of time talking it all over on the
telephone from Chequers. I spoke with Richard Luce, now back in the
Foreign Office as Minister of State (Geoffrey Howe was in Athens),

Willie Whitelaw and Michael Heseltine. I approved the order that HMS
Antrim should sail from Colombia to the area of Grenada, remaining
beyond the horizon. In public it should be made clear that this was a
precautionary move designed to help with the evacuation of British
subjects from Grenada should this be required. In fact, it did not seem
necessary. The Deputy High Commissioner in Bridgetown (Barbados)
reported after a day’ visit to Grenada that British citizens were safe,
that the new regime in Grenada was willing to allow arrangements to
be made for them to leave if they wished and that Sir Paul Scoon, the
Governor-General (the Queen’ representative on the island) was well
and in reasonably good heart. He did not request our military
intervention, either directly or indirectly.
Suddenly the whole position changed. What precisely happened in
Washington I still do not know, but I find it hard to believe that
outrage at the Beirut bombing had nothing to do with it. I am sure
that this was not a matter of calculation, but rather of frustrated anger
— yet that did not make it any easier for me defend, not least to a
British House of Commons in which anti-American feeling on both
right and left was increasing. The fact that Grenada was also a
Commonwealth member, and that the Queen was Head of State, made
it harder still.
At 7.15 in the evening of Monday 24 October I received a message
from President Reagan while I was hosting a reception at Downing
Street. The President wrote that he was giving serious consideration to
the OECS request for military action. He asked for my thoughts and
advice. I was strongly against intervention and asked that a draft reply
be prepared at once on lines which I laid down. I then had to go to a
farewell dinner given by Princess Alexandra and her husband, Angus
Ogilvy, for the outgoing American Ambassador, J. J. Louis, Jnr. I said
to him: ‘Do you know what is happening about Grenada? Something is
going on.’He knew nothing about it.
I received a telephone call during the dinner to return immediately
to No. 10 and arrived back at 11.30 p.m. By then a second message
had arrived from the President. In this he stated that he had decided to
respond positively to the request for military action. I immediately
called a meeting with Geoffrey Howe, Michael Heseltine and the
military and we prepared my reply to the President’ two messages,
which was sent at 12.30 a.m. There was no difficulty in agreeing a
common line. My message concluded:
This action will be seen as intervention by a western country in the internal
affairs of a small independent nation, however unattractive its regime. I ask
you to consider this in the context of our wider East-West relations and of
the fact that we will be having in the next few days to present to our
Parliament and people the siting of Cruise missiles in this country. I must ask
you to think most carefully about these points. I cannot conceal that I am
deeply disturbed by your latest communication. You asked for my advice. I
have set it out and hope that even at this late stage you will take it into
account before events are irrevocable.

I followed this up twenty minutes later by telephoning President
Reagan on the hot-line. I told him that I did not wish to speak at any
length over the telephone but I did want him to consider very
carefully the reply which I had just sent. He undertook to do so but
said, ‘we are already at zero.’
At 7.45 that morning a further message arrived, in which the
President said that he had weighed very carefully the considerations
that I had raised but believed them to be outweighed by other factors.
In fact, the US military operation to invade Grenada began early that
morning. After some fierce fighting the leaders of the regime were
taken prisoner.
At the time I felt dismayed and let down by what had happened. At
best, the British Government had been made to look impotent; at
worst we looked deceitful. Only the previous afternoon Geoffrey had
told the House of Commons that he had no knowledge of any
American intention to intervene in Grenada. Now he and I would have
to explain how it had happened that a member of the Commonwealth
had been invaded by our closest ally, and more than that, whatever
our private feelings, we would also have to defend the United States’
reputation in the face of widespread condemnation.
The international reaction to American intervention was in general
strongly adverse. It certainly gave a propaganda boost to the Soviet
Union. In its early reports, Soviet television news apparently thought
that Grenada was a province of southern Spain. But soon their
propaganda machine began firing on all cylinders. The Cubans were
portrayed as having played an heroic role in resisting the invasion.
When I went to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in
New Delhi the following month it was still Grenada which was the
most controversial topic of discussion. President Mugabe claimed that
American action in Grenada would provide a precedent for South
Africa in dealing with her neighbours. My own public criticism of
American action and refusal to become involved in it also led to
temporarily bad relations with some of Britain’ long-standing friends
in the Caribbean. It was an unhappy time.
In Britain we had to face strong pressure, not least in the House of
Commons, to renegotiate the arrangements for the deployment of
Cruise missiles. The argument was that if the Americans had not
consulted us about Grenada, why should they do so as regards the use
of Cruise missiles. Similarly, the new leader of the SDP, David Owen,
wrote in the Daily Mail on 28 October that ‘British public opinion will
simply not accept any longer the Prime Minister’ refusal to insist on a
dual mechanism to cover the launching procedures for any Cruise
missiles that are deployed in Britain before the end of this year.’
So when President Reagan telephoned me on the evening of
Wednesday 26 October during an emergency House of Commons
debate on the American action I was not in the sunniest of moods. The

President began by saying, in that disarming way of his, that if he was
in London and dropped in to see me he would be careful to throw his
hat through the door first. He said he very much regretted the
embarrassment that had been caused and wanted to explain how it
had all happened. It was the need to avoid leaks of what was intended
which had been at the root of the problem. He had been woken at 3
o’clock in the morning with an urgent plea from the OECS. A group
had then convened in Washington to study the matter and there was
already fear of a leak. By the time he had received my message setting
out my concerns the zero hour had passed and American forces were
on their way. The military action had gone well and the aim was now
to secure democracy.

There was not much I felt able to say and so I more or less held my
peace, but I was glad to have received the telephone call. At that
Thursday’ Cabinet there was a long discussion of what had happened. I
told my colleagues that our advice against US intervention had, I
believed, been sound. But the US, for its part, had taken a different
view on an issue which directly touched its national interests. Britain’
friendship with the United States must on no account be jeopardized.
Just as events in the Lebanon had affected American action in
Grenada, so what I had seen in the crisis over Grenada affected my
attitude to the Lebanon. I was concerned that American lack of
consultation and unpredictability might be repeated there with very
damaging consequences.
Naturally, I understood that the United States wanted to strike back
after the terrorist outrage against its servicemen in Beirut. But
whatever military action now took place, I wanted it to be a lawful,
measured and effective response. I sent a message to President Reagan
on 4 November welcoming assurances which Geoffrey Howe had
received from George Shultz that there would be no hasty reaction by
the Americans in retaliation and urging that a more broadly based
Lebanese Government be constructed. The President replied to me on
7 November, emphasizing that any action would be a matter of selfdefence, not of revenge, but adding that those who committed the
atrocity must not be allowed to strike again if it was possible to
prevent them. A week later he sent me a further message saying that
although he had not yet made a final decision he was inclined to take
decisive but carefully limited military action. The US had reports of
planning for other terrorist acts against the MNF and he intended to
deter these. He added that, because of the need for absolute secrecy,
knowledge of his current thinking was being severely limited within
the US Government.
I quickly replied to the President. I said that I well understood all
the pressures upon him to take action but I wanted to give him my
frank views about the decision which only he could take. Any action
must in my view be clearly limited to legitimate self-defence. It would
be necessary to ensure the avoidance of civilian casualties and

minimize the opportunities for hostile propaganda. Surprise was likely
to be difficult because a range of possible targets had been publicly
discussed by the media for days past. I was glad that he did not
envisage involving Israel or targetting Syria or Iran, action against
either of which would be very dangerous. I hoped that my message
was as clear as it could be: I did not believe that retaliatory action was
advisable. However, in the end France did launch air strikes — at
American urging, as President Mitterrand told me later. And in
response to attacks on its aircraft, the United States struck at Syrian
positions in central Lebanon in December.
These retaliations in the Lebanon failed to have any effect. The
position there continued to deteriorate. The real question was no
longer whether there should be a withdrawal but how to effect one. In
February 1984 the Lebanese Army lost control of West Beirut and the
Lebanese Government collapsed. The time had clearly come to get out
and a firm joint decision with the United States and other members of
the MNF was accordingly made to do so and detailed plans for this
tricky operation were drawn up. I left it to the British commander on
the ground to make the final decision as to what time of the day to
move. He decided that it should be done by night. But I suddenly
learned that President Reagan would be making a broadcast that
evening to tell the American people what would be happening and
why. Obviously it became necessary to alert our men to be ready to
move as soon as they could. Then, at the last minute, while I was at
Buckingham Palace for an audience with the Queen, I received a
message that the President was reconsidering the decision and would
not after all broadcast. As it turned out — not greatly to my surprise
— the postponement decision promptly leaked and the President had
to make his broadcast in any case. Clearly, we could not carry on like
this, putting the safety of British troops at risk: so I refused to
countermand the planned withdrawal of our men to British naval
vessels lying offshore, which was duly effected with the British Army’
usual professionalism. In fact, all the MNF forces were shortly
withdrawn to ships away from the perils they would have faced on
shore. Nothing could now be done to save the Lebanon; the
reconstituted Lebanese Government increasingly fell under the control
of a Syria whose hostility to the West was now reinforced; and in
March the MNF force returned home.
The American intervention in the Lebanon — well intentioned as it
was — was clearly a failure. It seemed to me that what happened
there contained important lessons which we should heed. First, it is
unwise to intervene in such situations unless you have a clear, agreed
objective and are prepared and able to commit the means to secure it.
Second, there is no point in indulging in retaliatory action which
changes nothing on the ground. Third, one must avoid taking on a
major regional power, like Syria, unless one is prepared to face up to
the full consequences of doing so.

By contrast, American intervention in Grenada was, in fact, a
success. Democracy was restored, to the advantage not only of the
islanders themselves but also of their neighbours who could look
forward to a more secure and prosperous future. No one would weep
any tears over the fate of the Marxist thugs whom the Americans had
dislodged. Yet even governments acting on the best of motives are
wise to respect legal forms. Above all, democracies have to show their
superiority to totalitarian governments which know no law.
Admittedly, the law on these matters is by no means clear, as was
confirmed for me during a seminar I held after the Grenada affair to
consider the legal basis for military intervention in another country.
Indeed, to my surprise, I found that the lawyers at the seminar were
more inclined to argue on grounds of realpolitik and the politicians
were more concerned with the issue of legitimacy. My own instinct
was — and is — always to found military action on the right of selfdefence, which ultimately no outside body has the authority to
question.
THE EUROPEAN COUNCIL AT ATHENS
Grenada was still very much on my mind when I went to Bonn for one
of my regular Anglo-German summits with Chancellor Kohl on
Tuesday 8 November. Like me, Chancellor Kohl was worried about the
impact of the American action on European public opinion in the runup to the deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles later that month.
The West German Government had originally been very critical of the
Grenada operation but had since toned this down. Helmut Kohl was
showing a good deal of courage as well as political cunning in
handling West German public opinion at this crucial time, and I
admired him for it.
The main purpose of my visit, however, was to seek German support
for the line I would take at the European Council in Athens, now just a
few weeks away. So Athens was the principal topic of my discussion
with him, in which we were later joined by Geoffrey Howe and the
German Foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher. I began by making
what I hoped would be the welcome suggestion that the next President
of the European Commission should come from Germany, if the
German Government wished to put forward a candidate. As I had
rather expected, it appeared that they did not. Chancellor Kohl said
that he agreed with me that the Commission was too big and tended to
create unnecessary work. Then a little more diplomacy: I said that our
aim was to build on the excellent foundation laid under the German
presidency. After this we got down to business. I stressed the need for
firm control of spending on the CAP if there was to be anything left of
the Community’ ‘own resources’ for other purposes, such as the
development of the electronics industry, which the Germans wanted. I
also warned against allowing growing protectionism to create another

area of disagreement with the United States. The Germans were most
interested in the future level of MC As,* which affected German
farmers’ incomes, and the steel industry where they considered that
they were receiving a raw deal and that the Italians were using
subsidies to undercut German producers. I hoped that at the end of
this discussion each side had understood the areas on which we would
stand firm and those where compromise was possible. In particular, I
hoped that the Germans realized how serious I was about achieving
my objectives on the budget question at Athens.
As usual before European Councils I held a number of preparatory
meetings with ministers and officials. This was partly to ensure that I
was thoroughly briefed, but also to sort out with colleagues our
precise objective on each issue. It was not enough to decide what was
ideal for us: I had also to establish and fully master the least bad
alternatives. All too often the ideal was not attainable.
In the meetings for Athens on the budget question both Nigel
Lawson and I felt that we had to be really tough in pressing for the
required package if there were to be any question of our agreeing to
an increase in the Community’ ‘own resources’. We had to be satisfied
with the way the burden on Britain was measured. The result must
reflect our ability to pay. And whatever system was finally agreed
must be able to be relied upon to work over time and without
significant damage to the UK position. Above all, to take into account
relative prosperity, we decided to press the view that if a member
state’ GDP per head was 90 per cent or less of the Community average
it should make no net contribution at all, with states above that
threshold making progressively higher contributions the richer they
were. (This scheme was known as ‘the safety net’ or ‘threshold’
system.)
I wanted to ensure that at Athens I was given a proper opportunity
to have the budget discussed early on, because the talks would be long
and hard. So I wrote to the Council President, the Greek Prime
Minister Andreas Papandreou, asking that we start the Council by
dealing with the budget imbalances and linked issues. My letter,
however, crossed with one from him in which he said that he wanted
to deal with agriculture first. It was not a good start.
Yet when I left for Athens there did seem grounds for reasonable
optimism. The Germans appeared to understand our position and there
had even been encouraging signs from the French. It was to be a
somewhat longer summit than usual and I hoped the time would be
used productively.
The Community heads of government met in the magnificent
Zappeion Hall, a classical Greek building adapted to the needs of a
modern conference centre. At the first session of the Council that
afternoon I was sitting opposite President Mitterrand and Chancellor
Kohl. I noticed that whereas my own table was covered with piles of
heavily annotated briefing on different complex agricultural and

financial issues, no such encumbrance appeared in front of my French
and German counterparts. This doubtless made for an impression of
appropriately Olympian detachment, but it also suggested that they
had not mastered the detail. And this turned out to be the case.
Throughout the meeting Chancellor Kohl seemed unwilling or unable
to make much effective contribution. Worse, President Mitterrand
appeared not only badly briefed on the issues but strangely — I think
genuinely — misinformed about his own Government’ position, as it
had previously been set out by French ministers and officials.
The Greek Presidency did not assist much either. Mr Papandreou
always proved remarkably effective in gaining Community subsidies
for Greece but he was less skilful in his present role as President of the
European Council. As his earlier letter to me had proposed, he insisted
on trying to reach agreement on agriculture before moving on to the
question of finance and the British budget contribution. Obviously, it
would have been made better sense to face the Community countries
with the financial realities first and then deal with the agricultural
issues, from which so much of the financial problem derived and on
which different countries had sharply opposing national interests. And
we never seemed to get by without a tear-jerking homily on the
predicament of Ireland from the Irish Prime Minister, Dr Garret
FitzGerald, who was determined if he could to exempt his country
from the disciplines on agricultural spending. I made it clear that any
preferential treatment for the Republic would have to be matched by
similar treatment for Northern Ireland. The first day was more or less
a write-off.
I was, therefore, already pessimistic by the time I returned that
night to the British Ambassador’ Residence to discuss with my officials
how we should conduct ourselves the following day (Monday). But it
was only on the Monday that it became obvious that the summit
would indeed fail. When the Council met, to my astonishment
President Mitterrand made it clear that France’ position on the budget
had completely changed. France was no longer prepared to support us
in pressing for a long-term settlement of the British budget problem. In
repeated interjections, I said that I would not agree to an increase in
the Community’ ‘own resources’ unless spending on the CAP was
contained and decreased as a share of the total budget and unless
member states’ contributions were fair and in line with the ability to
pay. The argument continued, but I was clearly getting nowhere.
On Tuesday I had a working breakfast with President Mitterrand.
We were so far apart that there was no point in spending much time
discussing Community issues at all and we largely concentrated
instead on the Lebanon. The French President seemed blissfully
unaware of the damage his own turnabout had done. He said jokingly
that unless we demonstrated that discussions between Britain and
France were continuing, the press would soon be talking about a
return to the Hundred Years’ War. So in what I hoped was a suitably

nonbelligerent way I told him how his attitude at the Council had
taken me by surprise, given the fact that I was going along with the
proposals on the budget which the French Finance minister, one M.
Jacques Delors, had been advancing. The President asked me precisely
what I meant and I explained. But I received no very satisfactory or
clear response.
Where we did see eye to eye — at least in private — was about
Germany. I said that even though the Germans were willing to be
generous because they received other political benefits from the
Community, a new generation of Germans might arise who would
refuse to make such a large contribution. This would risk a revival of
German neutralism — a temptation which, as President Mitterrand
rightly said, was already present.
The meeting had been an amicable one and I tried to keep the
atmosphere relatively friendly after the Council broke up, as in press
interviews I avoided being too harsh about France’ performance. After
all, M. Mitterrand was to be the next President of the Council and so it
would fall to him to chair the crucial meetings as we at last
approached the time when the Community’ money ran out. It did cross
my mind that he might have wished to delay a settlement until he
could take credit for it in his own presidency.
No communiqué was issued at the end of the Athens Council: we
had had no time in plenary sessions to discuss any of the wider
international issues and agree a line on them. The Council was widely
and accurately described as a fiasco. But my frustration was
diminished by the fact that I knew that time was on my side.
Until 1982 the Canadian Constitution was still based on British Acts of Parliament,
which only Westminster could amend, though of course in every practical sense
Canada has long been an independent state. In that year at Canadian request we
legislated to ‘patriate’ the constitution and the process of amendment, passing it over
to full Canadian control.
*

*

See pp. 451–3.

Monetary Compensatory Amounts (MCAs) were a system of border taxes and levies
on CAP products.
*

CHAPTER XIII

Mr Scargill’s Insurrection
The background to and course of the year-long miners’ strike of 1984
— 1985

PRELUDE
The 1983 general election result was the single most devastating
defeat ever inflicted upon democratic socialism in Britain. After being
defeated on a manifesto that was the most candid statement of
socialist aims ever made in this country, the Left could never again
credibly claim popular appeal for their programme of massive
nationalization, hugely increased public spending, greater trade union
power and unilateral nuclear disarmament. But there was also
undemocratic socialism, and it too would need to be beaten. I had
never had any doubt about the true aim of the hard Left: they were
revolutionaries who sought to impose a Marxist system on Britain
whatever the means and whatever the cost. Many of them made no
effort to conceal their purpose. For them the institutions of democracy
were no more than tiresome obstacles on the long march to a Marxist
Utopia. While the electoral battle was still being fought their hands
had been tied by the need to woo more moderate opinion, but in the
aftermath of defeat they were free from constraint and thirsting for
battle on their own terms.
The hard Left’s power was entrenched in three institutions: the
Labour Party, local government and the trade unions. From all three
bases they now proceeded to challenge our renewed mandate.
Predictably, it was the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), led by
its Marxist president, Arthur Scargill, who were destined to provide
the shock troops for the Left’s attack. The intention was plain. Within
a month of the 1983 election Mr Scargill was saying openly that he did
not ‘accept that we are landed for the next four years with this
Government’. And this would be an attack directed not only against
the Government, but against anyone and anything standing in the way
of the Left, including fellow miners and their families, the police, the
courts, the rule of law and Parliament itself.
After the experience of the Conservative Government of 1970 — 74
I hardly doubted that one day we would have to face another miners’
strike. From the time of Mr Scargill’s election to the leadership of the
NUM in 1981 I knew it. I had no desire for such a strike. There was no
economic rationale for it. The National Coal Board (NCB), the
Government and the great majority of miners wanted a thriving,
successful, competitive coal industry. But history intertwined with

myth seemed to have made coal mining in Britain a special case: it had
become an industry where reason simply did not apply. Britain’s
industrial revolution was to a large extent based on the easy
availability of coal. At the industry’s height on the eve of the First
World War it employed more than a million men to work over 3,000
mines. Production was 292 million tons. Thereafter decline was
continuous, and relations between miners and owners frequently
bitter. Conflict in the coal industry precipitated Britain’s only general
strike in 1926. (Prefiguring later developments, the miners’ union split
during the year-long coal strike that followed the general strike, and a
separate union was set up in Nottinghamshire.) Successive
governments between the wars found themselves dragged ever deeper
into the task of rationalizing and regulating the industry, and in 1946
the post-war Labour Government finally nationalized it outright. By
that time production was down to 187 million tons at 980 pits, with a
workforce of just over 700,000.
Government now began setting targets for coal production and
investment in a series of documents inaugurated by the ‘Plan for Coal’
in 1950. These consistently overestimated both the demand for coal
and the prospects for improvements in productivity within the
industry. The only targets that were met were those for investment.
Public money was poured in, but two problems proved insoluble:
overcapacity and union resistance to the closure of uneconomic pits.
As the industry declined miners relied more and more on industrial
muscle to keep themselves in work.
By the 1970s the coal mining industry had come to symbolize every
thing that was wrong with Britain. In February 1972 mass pickets led
by Arthur Scargill forced the closure of the Saltley Coke Depot in
Birmingham by sheer weight of numbers. It was a frightening
demonstration of the impotence of the police in the face of such
disorder. The fall of Ted Heath’s Government after a general election
precipitated by the 1973 — 4 miners’ strike lent substance to the myth
that the NUM had the power to make or break British Governments, or
at the very least the power to veto any policy threatening their
interests by preventing coal getting to the power stations.
I have already described the threat of a miners’ strike which we
faced in February 1981 and the way in which this was averted.* From
then on it was really only a question of time. Would we be sufficiently
prepared to win the fight when the inevitable challenge came? A
milestone was reached when Mr Scargill won the union presidency at
the end of 1981 and the power of the NUM and the fear it inspired
came into the hands of those whose objectives were openly political.
It fell mainly to Nigel Lawson who became Secretary of State for
Energy in September 1981 to build up — steadily and unprovocatively
— the stocks of coal which would allow the country to endure a coal
strike. We were to hear a lot of the word ‘endurance’ over the next few
months. To maximize endurance it was vital that coal stocks be in

place at the power stations and not at the pit heads, from which
miners’ pickets could make movement impossible. But coal stocks
were not the only element determining power station endurance. Some
Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) power stations were oil
fired. Ordinarily they were used only part of the time, to meet peak
demand, but if needed they could be run continuously to help meet
the ‘base load’ — that element of electricity demand that is more or
less constant. ‘Oilburn’ was expensive, but would add significantly to
the system’s ability to withstand a strike. An additional advantage was
that oil supplies to the power stations were relatively secure. Nuclearpowered stations, providing about 14 per cent of supply, were mostly
some distance away from the coal fields and of course their primary
fuel supply was also secure. Over the next few years more Advanced
Gas-cooled Reactors (AGRs) would be coming on stream and would
steadily reduce our dependence on coal-fired power. We were still
building a cross-Channel link which would allow us to buy power from
France, though we already had a link in operation between the English
and Scottish systems (‘the Scottish interconnector’). We also did our
best to encourage industry to hold more stocks.
Danger began to loom in the autumn of 1983. Peter Walker was now
Secretary of State for Energy, a job to which I had appointed him after
the general election in June. As he had shown at Agriculture in our
first Parliament, he was a tough negotiator. He was also a skilled
communicator, something which I knew would be important if we
were to retain public support in the coal strike which the militants
would some day force upon us. Peter regularly telephoned newspaper
editors in person to put over our case. This was never my preferred
way, but I recognized its effectiveness during the strike. Unfortunately,
Peter Walker never really got on with Ian MacGregor, and this
sometimes created tensions.
Ian MacGregor took over as Chairman of the NCB on 1 September.
He had been an excellent Chairman of the British Steel Corporation,
turning the Corporation around after the damaging three-month steel
strike in 1980. If Britain’s coal industry was ever to become a
successful business rather than a system of outdoor relief, he had the
experience and determination to make this happen. Unlike the militant
miners’ leaders, Ian MacGregor genuinely wanted to see a thriving
coal industry making good use of investment, technology and human
resources. Perhaps his greatest quality was courage. Within the NCB
itself he often found himself surrounded by people who had made
their careers in an atmosphere of appeasement and collaboration with
the NUM and who greatly resented the changed atmosphere he
brought with him. Yet it transpired that Ian MacGregor was strangely
lacking in guile. He was quite used to dealing with financial
difficulties and hard bargaining. But he had no experience of dealing
with trade union leaders intent on using the process of negotiation to
score political points. Time and again he and his colleagues were

outmanoeuvred by Arthur Scargill and the NUM leadership. During
the strike Peter Walker and I followed with constant anxiety every
phase of the battle for public opinion. The NUM leadership used every
device to distort the truth and misinform the public and their own
members.
On Friday 21 October 1983 an NUM delegate conference voted for a
ban on overtime in protest at the Board’s 5.2 per cent pay offer and at
prospective pit closures. In itself, with coal stocks as high as they
were, an overtime ban was unlikely to have much effect. It probably
had an ulterior purpose: to increase tension among the miners and so
make them more prepared for a strike when the NUM leadership
thought that one could successfully be engineered. We always knew
that it was pit closures that were more likely to ignite a strike than a
dispute about pay. The case for closures on economic grounds
remained overwhelming. Even Labour had acknowledged it: thirty-two
pits had been closed under the Labour Government between 1974 and
1979. Mr Scargill, however, denied the economic case for closure. His
line was that no pit should be closed unless it was physically
exhausted. Indeed, he denied the existence of ‘uneconomic pits’: in his
view a pit that made a loss — and there were many — simply required
further investment. Called to give evidence before a Select Committee,
he had been asked whether there was any level of loss that he would
deem intolerable. He replied memorably: ‘As far as I am concerned,
the loss is without limit.’
During the autumn and winter of 1983 — 4 Ian MacGregor
formulated his plans. At that time manpower in the industry was
202,000. The Monopolies and Mergers Commission had produced a
report into the coal industry in 1983 which showed that some 75 per
cent of the pits were making a loss. Faced with this, Mr MacGregor
began with the aim of bringing the industry to break-even point by
1988. In September 1983 he told Government that he intended to cut
the workforce by some 64,000 over three years, reducing capacity by
25 million tons. There was, though, never any secret ‘hit list’ of pits
due for closure: decisions as to which pits were to be closed would be
made on a pit-by-pit basis under the existing colliery review
procedure. He came back to us in December 1983 indicating that he
had decided to accelerate the programme, aiming to cut the workforce
by 44,000 over the next two years; to achieve this he urged us to
extend the existing redundancy scheme to include miners under the
age of fifty. The terms we agreed in January 1984 were extremely
generous: £1,000 for each year of service, paid as a lump sum, the
scheme to operate for two years only, so that a man who had been in
the pits all his working life would get over £30,000. In the coming
year, 1984 — 5, Mr MacGregor proposed 20,000 redundancies. We
were confident that this figure could be achieved without anyone
being forced to leave the industry against their will. Around twenty
pits would close and annual capacity would be reduced by 4 million

tons a year.
As discussions continued accusations began to fly about a ‘hit list’ of
pits. The rhetoric of the NUM leadership took ever greater leave of
reality — in particular, of the economic reality that the industry was
receiving £1.3 billion of subsidies from the taxpayer in 1983 — 4. It
sounded as if Mr Scargill was preparing to lead his troops into battle.
At the end of February there was an early intimation of the violence
which would characterize the strike when Ian MacGregor — then 70
years old — was knocked to the ground at a Northumberland colliery
by demonstrating miners. I was shocked and wrote to convey my
sympathy. Far worse was to come.
Obviously we realized that a strike was always possible, but we
doubted whether it would happen before the end of 1984, when
winter set in and the demand for coal was at its annual peak. To begin
a strike in the spring would be the worst possible tactic for the NUM.
But this was a point on which Mr Scargill misled his own members: in
February he was making wild claims, saying that the CEGB had only
eight weeks of coal stocks. In fact stocks were far higher — something
that could have been deduced from figures in the public domain.
However, the union had a tradition of balloting its members before
strike action took place, and there was good reason to think that Mr
Scargill would not get the necessary majority (55 per cent) to call a
national strike at any point in the immediate future. Since he had
become President the NUM membership had voted against strike
action three times already. We could not have foreseen the desperate
and self-destructive tactics he chose to adopt.
THE STRIKE BEGINS
On Thursday 1 March the NCB announced the closure of the Yorkshire
colliery of Cortonwood. The announcement was not particularly well
handled by the local NCB: the impression was given that the colliery
review procedure was being by-passed, whereas in fact the NCB had
had no such intention. But the executive of the radical Yorkshire area
of the NUM — Mr Scargill’s home ground — announced a strike in
protest at the decision, relying on a local ballot held two years
previously to provide authority for their action.
Cortonwood may have triggered the strike, but it was not the cause.
The truth is that once the NUM leadership had become determined to
resist the closure of any pit on economic grounds the strike was
inevitable, unless the NCB had been prepared to abdicate effective
control of the industry. Even if Cortonwood had never happened, a
meeting between the NCB and the mining unions on 6 March might
have had the same result. Ian MacGregor outlined his plans for the
coming year and confirmed the figure of twenty closures. The reaction
from the NUM was swift. That same day the Scottish NUM called a
strike from 12 March. Two days later, on Thursday 8 March, the

national executive of the NUM met and gave official support to the
Yorkshire and Scottish strikes.
Under rule 43 of the NUM constitution a national strike could only
be called if the union held a national ballot and a majority of 55 per
cent voted in favour. The militant majority on the executive doubted
whether they could win such a national ballot, but they found a
procedural way round the problem. Under rule 41 of the constitution,
the national executive could give official sanction to strikes declared
by the constituent areas that made up the union. If all the areas could
be pushed into action individually, this would have the effect of a
national strike without the need for a national ballot. If any proved
difficult, pickets could be sent from striking areas to intimidate them
into joining the dispute. This ruthless strategy very nearly worked. But
in the end it proved to be a disaster for its authors.
The strike began on Monday 12 March. Over the following two
weeks the brutal weight of the militants’ shock troops descended on
the coal fields and for a moment it seemed as if rationality and
decency would go under. At the beginning of the first day of the strike
83 pits were working and 81 were out. Ten of these, I was told, were
not working due to heavy picketing rather than any positive desire to
join the strike. By the end of the day the number of pits not working
had risen to about 100. The police were fighting a losing battle to
ensure that those who wished to work could do so. The Home Office
— both ministers and officials — gave them the fullest support, but
the situation worsened. On Tuesday morning the flying pickets again
descended. On that day it so happened that I was due to see Ian
MacGregor about the Channel Tunnel — a quite separate matter in
which he had an interest. Peter Walker joined us afterwards and we
discussed the situation in the coal fields. Mr MacGregor told me that
he had applied for and obtained a civil injunction in the High Court
against the NUM executive to restrain the use of flying pickets, using
our new trade union law. However, his impression was that the police
were failing to uphold the criminal law and that pickets had been able
to prevent people going to work. The threat of violence had already
resulted in the postponement of plans to hold a strike ballot in the
Lancashire area. The Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire areas were due
to vote on Thursday but there was a real danger that the vote would
be frustrated or that intimidation would force miners to stay at home.
I told him that I was dismayed at this news. It was a repetition of what
had happened in Saltley in 1972. The criminal law had to be upheld. I
said that helping those who wished to work was not enough:
intimidation must be stopped.
I went straight out of this meeting and asked to speak to Leon
Brittan. As luck would have it the next meeting that day had originally
been called to discuss the issue of strikes in essential services, on
which we had a manifesto commitment, and Leon and other relevant
ministers were already on their way. At the meeting I repeated that we

must uphold the criminal law as it related to picketing. Leon shared
my unease at what was happening. His view was that the police
already had all the powers they needed to deal with the problem,
including the power to turn pickets back and to disperse them if they
assembled in excessive numbers. He told us that he had made this
position clear in public and would repeat the message. But, of course,
there were tight constitutional limits on what he, as Home Secretary,
could do to instruct the police on their duties. We agreed that Michael
Havers would set out the legal position to the House. I was determined
that the message should go out from government loud and clear: there
would be no surrender to the mob and the right to go to work would
be upheld.

Mass picketing continued. By Wednesday morning only twenty-nine
pits were working normally. The police were by now drafting in
officers from around the country to protect the miners who wanted to
work: 3000 police officers from seventeen forces were involved. At
this point in the dispute the violence centred on Nottinghamshire,
where the flying pickets from Yorkshire were determined to secure a
quick victory. However, the Nottinghamshire men went ahead with
their ballot and the result that Friday showed 73 per cent against the
strike. Area ballots the following day in the Midlands, the North-West
and the North-East coalfields also gave heavy majorities against strike
action. Altogether, of the 70,000 miners balloted, over 50,000 voted to
work.
Early though it was, this was one of the turning points of the strike.
The huge police operation was highly effective and together with the
moral force of the ballot results it reversed the trend towards a shut
down of the pits. The first, crucial battle had been won. On Monday
morning the latest information was telephoned through to me in
Brussels, where I was attending a European Council. Forty-four pits
were now working, compared with just eleven on Friday. In the areas
which had voted for a return to work the great majority of pits had
gone back. The militants knew that if it had not been for the courage
and competence of the police the result would have been very
different and from now on they and their mouthpieces in the Labour
Party began a campaign of vilification against them.
On the day the NUM executive met, I told Cabinet that I would set
up a committee of ministers under my chairmanship to monitor the
strike and to decide what action should be taken. Willie Whitelaw was
a member, of course, and deputized for me when I could not be
present, though this was rarely necessary. Peter Walker, as Energy
Secretary, and Leon Brittan, as Home Secretary, were crucial figures.
The Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, was directly concerned as the issue was
of vital importance to the economy; he also brought to bear his
experience as former Energy Secretary. Norman Tebbit (Trade and
Industry), Tom King (Employment) and Nick Ridley (Transport), all
had obvious contributions to make. We sought to minimize the impact

of the strike on industry to prevent the strike spreading by sympathy
action and to keep coal stocks moving by road and rail. In Scotland,
George Younger had responsibility both for Scottish mining and for
Scotland’s police. All these ministers or their deputies regularly
attended. When issues of law arose the Attorney-General, Michael
Havers, also joined us. The group met about once a week, though
more frequently when conditions required it. In practice the large
membership sometimes proved unwieldy and so Peter Walker and I
made some important decisions in smaller meetings, called ad hoc to
deal with developments as they arose, particularly when notice was
short.
There was a wider question relating to the work of this committee,
however: to determine the proper role of government in the strike. I
repeatedly made it clear that prime responsibility for dealing with the
strike lay with the managements of the NCB and those other
nationalized industries involved (the CEGB, BSC and British Rail (BR)).
They operated within financial and other constraints set by
government and by statute. But so much was at stake that no
responsible government could take a ‘hands-off’ attitude: the dispute
threatened the country’s economic survival. Consequently, I tried to
combine respect for their freedom of action with clear signals as to
what would or would not be financially and politically acceptable. The
Opposition never seemed to be able to make up their mind whether
we were intervening too much or too little. Their uncertainty,
combined with the successful outcome, suggests to me that perhaps we
got the delicate balance about right.
The Government’s relationship with the police and the courts was an
even more sensitive issue during the strike. Britain had no national
police force: the police were organized into fifty-two local forces, each
headed by a Chief Constable who had operational control. Authority
was divided between the Home Secretary, local police authorities
(made up of local councillors and magistrates) and Chief Constables.
Inevitably during the miners’ strike this tripartite system of policing
was put under considerable strain: challenges to the rule of law posed
by violence on the scale that took place during this strike clearly
needed to be dealt with, swiftly and efficiently, at national level.
Accordingly, the National Reporting Centre (NRC) — originally set up
in 1972 — was activated in Scotland Yard, allowing the police to pool
intelligence and to co-ordinate assistance from one force to another
under the ‘mutual aid’ provisions of the 1964 Police Act. However, the
tripartite system survived a good deal better than the Labour Party’s
hysterical denunciations might have suggested. Problems did arise in
financing the extra police costs under this system, but these were
resolved by steadily taking more and more of the burden on to the
Exchequer.
Mob violence can only be defeated if the police have the complete
moral and practical support of government. We made it clear that the

politicians would not let them down. We had already given them the
equipment and the training they would need, learning the lessons of
the 1981 inner-city riots. More recently the police had shown
themselves skilled in tackling violence masquerading as picketing
when pickets from the National Graphical Association (NGA) had tried
to close down Eddie Shah’s newspaper in Warrington in November
1983. On that occasion the police had made it clear that force of
numbers would not be allowed to prevent people from going to work
if they wished to do so. They had also for the first time made effective
use of powers to prevent a breach of the peace by turning back pickets
before they arrived at their destination.
Another prerequisite of effective policing is that the law should be
clear. Early in the strike Michael Havers made a lucid statement in a
written answer to the Commons, setting out the scope of police powers
to deal with mass picketing, including the power (mentioned above) to
turn back pickets on their way to the picket line when there are
reasonable grounds to expect a breach of the peace. These common
law powers long predated our trade union legislation, and were
matters of criminal rather that civil law. In the second week of the
strike the Kent NUM challenged those powers in court, but they lost
the case. The prevention of large numbers of pickets assembling to
intimidate those who wished to work would be vital to the outcome of
the dispute.
The relationship between government and the courts was, if
anything, more sensitive still. It is right that people should have been
vigilant on this question. The independence of the judiciary is a matter
of constitutional principle, though the administration of the courts
falls properly within the sphere of government responsibilities. As the
incidents of violence accumulated it became a real concern to us that
so few of those charged had been brought to court and convicted. It is
vital if the rule of law is to prevail that criminal actions as visible as
those during the strike be punished quickly: people need to see that
the law is working. A backlog of cases built up, stemming partly from
the delaying tactics of offenders and their solicitors, partly from the
obstruction of some magistrates in areas where there was sympathy
with the strikers’ cause. The sheer number of cases also imposed a
sudden strain on the system. In time we made available more
buildings and professional stipendiary magistrates and the backlog
began to be cleared. Stipendiary magistrates get through many more
cases than their lay counterparts, but the Lord Chancellor could only
respond to requests for help and had no power to make appointments
unasked. Another problem was that policemen trying to defend
themselves against hails of missiles and other assaults have little time
to assemble detailed evidence. Cases were difficult to sustain. In the
end all too many of the men of violence went unpunished.
By the last week of March the situation was fairly clear. The strike
was unlikely to be over quickly. At the majority of pits Mr Scargill and

his colleagues had a tight grip, which it would not be easy to break.
But in our planning over the previous two years we had not allowed
ourselves to assume that any coal would be mined during a strike,
whereas in fact a substantial section of the industry was still working.
If we could move this coal to the power stations then the prospects for
endurance would be transformed. This calculation had an enormous
impact on our strategy. We had to act so that at any one time we did
not unite against us all the unions involved in the use and distribution
of coal. This consideration meant that we all had to be very careful
when and where the civil law was used and the NCB suspended —
though it did not withdraw — its civil action.
Although Mr Scargill had been very anxious to avoid a ballot before
the strike began, it was clear to us that he wanted to keep the
possibility open. Indeed the following month an NUM Special Delegate
Conference voted to reduce the majority required for a strike from 55
per cent to 50 per cent. Also at the beginning of the strike we had
hopes that moderates on the NUM executive might succeed in forcing
a ballot. This made it even more important to keep the balance of
opinion among miners favourable to our cause because it seemed that
much of the opposition to the strike came from miners angry not to
have been allowed to vote. Would a ballot held during a strike, with
emotions raised, produce a majority for or against Mr Scargill? I was
not entirely sure.
The NUM leadership was desperate to prevent the movement of coal
by rail, by road or by sea. Although at times during the dispute there
were problems in the docks and they had some limited success in
slowing rail traffic, the lorry drivers refused to be intimidated by the
dockers or anyone else. Increasingly, and to a degree that we had not
anticipated, road haulage firms were able to keep coal moving to the
power stations and other main industrial customers. The steel workers
had endured their own long and damaging strike and they were not
keen to see plant destroyed and jobs lost in their own industry simply
in order to demonstrate sympathy with the NUM — a union which had
earlier shown remarkably little sympathy towards them. However, it
was the power workers whose attitude was most crucial. If they struck,
or acted in sympathy with the miners to prevent us moving to
maximum oilburn, we would have had great difficulties. But their
attitude was simply that they were not a party to the strike and that
their job was to see that the people of Britain had light and power. Nor
were their leaders prepared to be browbeaten by other trade union
bosses into doing what they regarded as fundamentally wrong.
Everything turned on maximizing endurance. I received weekly
reports from the Department of Energy setting out the position and I
read them very carefully indeed. Early in the strike the power stations
were consuming coal at the rate of about 1.7 million tons a week,
though the net reduction in stocks was smaller because some deliveries
were getting through. The CEGB estimated endurance at about six

months but this assumed a build-up to maximum oilburn — that is,
using oil-fired stations at full capacity — which had not yet begun. We
had to judge when this should be set in train because it would
certainly be described as provocative by the NUM leadership. We held
off while there seemed a prospect that NUM moderates might force a
ballot. However, I decided on Monday 26 March that this nettle must
now be grasped.
Industrial stocks were, of course, much lower than those at the
power stations: the cement industry was particularly vulnerable and
important. But it was BSC whose problems were most immediate.
Their integrated steel plants at Redcar and Scunthorpe would have to
close in the next fortnight if supplies of coke and coal were not
delivered and unloaded. Port Talbot, Ravenscraig and Llanwern had
stocks sufficient for no more than three to five weeks. Not surprisingly,
BSC was extremely concerned as the position changed from day to
day.
This was the state of uncertainty as we ended the first month of the
strike. Perhaps the only thing one could be sure of was Mr Scargill’s
intentions. He wrote in the Morning Star on 28 March that ‘the NUM is
engaged in a social and industrial Battle of Britain … what is urgently
needed is the rapid and total mobilization of the Trade Union and
Labour movement.’ It was still unclear whether he would get it.
The stalemate continued during April. There still seemed the
possibility of a ballot for a national strike whose result no one could
guess. In spite of continuing heavy picketing, there were some signs of
a drift back to work, particularly in Lancashire — though it was only a
drift. The leaders of the rail unions and the seamen promised to
support the miners in their struggle: there were many declarations of
this kind during the strike, but their members were less enthusiastic.
The first court cases against the NUM began: two coke hauliers began
legal action against the South Wales NUM picketing of Port Talbot
steelworks.
From early in the dispute we were worried that the NCB was failing
to put across its case, both to its own employees and to the general
public. This was not something that government could do for them,
though later (as will be seen) we pressed them to improve their
presentation. But on the question of upholding the law it was our role
to speak, and we did so vigorously. When I was interviewed on
Panorama by Sir Robin Day on Monday 9 April I strongly defended the
police handling of the dispute:
The police are upholding the law. They are not upholding the Government.
This is not a dispute between miners and government. This is a dispute
between miners and miners … it is the police who are in charge of upholding
the law … [they] have been wonderful.

A few days later, the police were on a different front line. On 17
April WPC Yvonne Fletcher was killed by machine-gun fire from the

Libyan Embassy in St James’s Square while policing a peaceful
demonstration. The whole country was shocked. In spite of which, Mr
Scargill was to open contacts with Libyan officials, and an NUM
official even met Colonel Gaddafi in the hope of raising money to
continue the strike. It was as if there was a preternatural alliance
between these different forces of disorder.
A LONG SLOG
In May there were brief but revealing contacts between the NCB and
the NUM leadership — the first since the strike began. The talks took
place on Wednesday 23 May; I had a full report the next day. Mr
Scargill would allow no one to speak for the NUM side but himself: the
other members of his executive had clearly been told to keep quiet.
The NCB had given two presentations, one on the marketing prospects
of the coal industry and another on the physical condition of the pits,
some of which were now in danger of becoming unworkable because
of the strike. At the end of each presentation the NUM representatives
declined to comment or to ask questions. Mr Scargill then made a
prepared statement. He insisted that there could be no discussion of
pit closures on grounds other than exhaustion — certainly no question
of closing pits on economic grounds. Ian MacGregor made some brief
remarks to the effect that he saw no purpose in continuing the meeting
in the light of this, but nevertheless he suggested further talks between
two senior members of the NCB and two senior representatives of the
NUM. Mr Scargill again insisted that the withdrawal of all closure
plans was a precondition for any talks. There the meeting ended. But
at that point the NUM sprung a trap. They asked to be allowed to stay
in the room in which the meeting had just taken place for a discussion
among themselves. Ian MacGregor saw this as a perfectly innocent
request and readily agreed. The NCB representatives left the room. But
later we discovered that the NUM had managed to persuade the press
that this was a ‘walkout’ by the NCB. Many people seized on the
episode as evidence that Ian MacGregor was unwilling to talk. It was a
classic example of the dangers of negotiating with people like Mr
Scargill.
Week by week the strike grew more bitter. There was evidence that
many miners were losing their early enthusiasm for it and questioning
Mr Scargill’s forecasts of limited power station endurance. The NUM
leadership responded by increasing the allowances they paid to pickets
— they paid nothing at all to strikers who did not turn out to picket —
recruiting non-miners to the task. There was a general escalation of
the level of violence. Their tactic evidently was to achieve maximum
surprise by concentrating large numbers of pickets at a particular pit
at the shortest possible notice. Perhaps the most shocking scenes of
violence were those which took place outside Orgreave Coke Works in
an attempt to prevent coke convoys reaching the Scunthorpe

steelworks. On Tuesday 29 May over 5,000 pickets engaged in violent
clashes with the police. The police were pelted with all kinds of
missiles, including bricks and darts, and sixty-nine people were
injured. Thank goodness they at least had proper protective riot gear, I
thought, as, like so many millions of others, I watched the terrible
scenes on television.
Speaking in Banbury the next day I said:
You saw the scenes … on television last night. I must tell you that what we
have got is an attempt to substitute the rule of the mob for the rule of the
law, and it must not succeed. There are those who are using violence and
intimidation to impose their will on others who do not want it. They are
failing because of two things. First, because of the magnificent police force,
well trained for carrying out their duties bravely and impartially. And
secondly, because the overwhelming majority of people in this country are
honourable, decent and law-abiding and want the law to be upheld and will
not be intimidated. I pay tribute to the courage of those who have gone into
work through these picket lines … the rule of law must prevail over the rule
of the mob.

Over the next three weeks there were further violent clashes at
Orgreave, but the pickets never succeeded in halting the road convoys.
The battles at Orgreave had an enormous impact and did a great deal
to turn public opinion against the miners.
It was at about this time that we had the first clear evidence of
large-scale intimidation in the mining villages. This problem grew
steadily worse as th strike went on. Working miners were not the only
targets: their wives and children were also at risk. The sheer
viciousness of what was done provides a useful antidote to some of the
more romantic talk about the spirit of the mining communities. In its
very nature intimidation is extremely difficult for the police to combat,
though as time went on officers in uniform and teams in plain clothes
were specially deployed to tackle it.
There was a good deal of public criticism of the failure of the
nationalized industries to use the civil remedies which our trade union
laws had provided. As the violence continued and the problems of BSC
in particular increased, the ministerial group frequently discussed
whether to encourage the use of the civil law against the NUM and
other unions involved in secondary action. Failure to take civil action
against the unions and their funds put all the pressure on to the
criminal law and onto the police whose duty it was to uphold it. It was
also pointed out that, if successful, legal action against union funds
would restrict their ability to finance mass pickets and to engage in
unlawful action. People were saying openly that our trade union
reforms were being discredited by the failure of the nationalized
industries involved to use the legal remedies. Instinctively, I had a
good deal of sympathy with this view, as did my advisers.
However, Peter Walker persuaded us that use of the civil law might
alienate the support we had among working miners or moderate trade
unionists. The chairmen of the BSC, NCB, BR and CEGB agreed with

him, at least for the present: they met towards the end of June and
decided that in all the circumstances this was not the time to apply for
an injunction. Nor were the police convinced that civil action would
make their job on the picket lines any easier. Of course, that did not
prevent others — whether businessmen or working miners — making
use of the new laws. The fact was that throughout this dispute there
was much to be said for emphasizing the point that it was the basic
criminal law of the country which was being flouted by the pickets
and their leaders, rather than ‘Thatcher’s laws’.
Peter Walker’s argument won the day, and the NCB went on to win
the strike. In a sense, therefore, the outcome justified the tactic. But
could the same result have been achieved earlier through civil action
leading, by way of the NUM’s defiance, to sequestration of union
funds? Such ‘might-have-beens’ are always impossible to resolve.
Looking back, however, we might reasonably have urged the
nationalized industries to take action against the NUM and at an
earlier stage. When the working miners actually did so on their own
initiative — the best possible outcome but not something on which we
should have relied — this put enormous pressure on Mr Scargill and
severely circumscribed the ability of the NUM to keep the strike going.
Since then, however, the use of ‘Thatcher’s laws’ has become standard
in Britain’s industrial relations and the number of strikes and
industrial disputes has plummetted.
Meanwhile, we kept a very close watch on the number of pits
reopening and men working. In July and August many pits close to
take their annual holidays and we had some hopes that there would be
a large-scale return to work when the holiday period ended, though
there were fears too that pits that had been working before the
holidays would fail to reopen due to renewed efforts by the pickets.
The cost of being on strike to miners and their families was one
consideration in estimating what would happen. But perhaps
psychology was more important. A really large return to work after the
holiday might create its own momentum. For his part, Mr Scargill
would try to persuade his troops that with autumn approaching there
was hope of the NCB being forced to back down by a government
unwilling to impose winter power cuts.
It was clearly very important that the NCB should do everything
possible to get its case over to those tempted to give up the strike and
return to work. On my recommendation, Tim Bell, who had given me
so much good advice on presentation in the past, had begun to advise
Ian MacGregor. There was certainly a powerful positive case to deploy:
massive new investment was available for the pits under existing
plans, though this was now being held up, and if work resumed there
was the promised pay rise for miners to look forward to. There was
also the negative side: pits might never reopen because of
deterioration which occurred while the strike continued. Customers
were being lost, probably permanently: no one in industry tempted by

our subsidies to change from other fuels to coal was likely to have
much faith in the reliability of coal supplies from now on. It would
also have been possible to go ahead with pit closures on economic
grounds while the strike was still on, and we debated this. But on
balance the risk of alienating moderate miners was too great. We also
had to consider whether to encourage more miners to take the
uniquely generous redundancy terms on offer. There were two
problems with respect to redundancy: first, even if large numbers of
miners took up the offer, there was no guarantee that they would be
from the pits we needed to close. And the savings lay in closing
uneconomic pits. Second, there was a real risk that it was the
moderate miners, sickened by the violence and intimidation, who
would find redundancy most attractive, leaving the hardliners in a
majority in particular areas or even nationally. So again we held fire.
July proved to be one of the most difficult months of the strike. On
Monday 9 July almost out of the blue the TGWU called a national
dock strike over a supposed breach of the National Dock Labour
Scheme (NDLS). The NDLS had been established by the Attlee
Government with the aim of eliminating casual labour in the docks.
Based on statute, it operated in the majority of British ports,
establishing a closed shop and giving the union extraordinary powers.
The occasion for the strike was BSC’s use of contract labour to move
iron ore by road from stockpiles in the docks at Immingham to the
Scunthorpe steelworks. In fact, BSC were satisfied that neither the
scheme nor local agreements had been breached. Under the scheme’s
absurd provisions ‘shadow’ labour consisting of registered dock
workers was required to stand and watch the work as it was being
done by contractors. This had been complied with in the ‘normal way’.
We hoped that the National Dock Labour Board, which included union
representatives, would give an early ruling to this effect. But the
TGWU leadership was strongly committed to supporting Mr Scargill
and plainly welcomed the opportunity to call a strike.
We had already made an extensive study of the implications of a
national dock strike in 1982. It seemed likely that the strike — which
would probably only seriously affect those ports which were part of
the NDLS — would have little direct impact on the outcome of the
coal strike. We were not importing coal for the power stations,
because it would have risked losing us the support of working miners.
But a dock strike would have serious implications for BSC by
disrupting its imports of coal and iron ore. Indeed, it looked as if a
major motive for the strike had been the desire of the left-wing TGWU
leadership to assist the miners by tightening their grip on the major
steel plants, counteracting BSC’s success in by-passing secondary
action on the railways by organizing road deliveries. The general
effect on trade would be very serious — particularly on imports of
food — though about a third of non-bulk cargo was carried by roll-on
— roll-off ships (known as ‘RO-RO’), much of which was driver-

accompanied and passed through ‘non-scheme’ ports such as Dover
and Felixstowe. Everything would depend on how well the strike was
supported and whether it was confined to the NDLS ports.
Our regular meetings of the ministerial group on coal now had to
deal with two strikes rather than one. I told the group on the day after
the dock strike began that it was vital to make a major effort to
mobilize opinion over the next forty-eight hours. We should urge the
port employers to adopt a resolute approach and use all available
means to strengthen opposition to the strike among workers in
industries likely to be damaged by it, and indeed among the public. It
must be clearly demonstrated that the pretext for the strike was false
and that those taking this action already enjoyed extraordinary
privileges. We should make the point that it was estimated that 4,000
out of the 13,000 dockers registered under the NDLS were surplus to
the requirements of the industry. Of course, this was not the right time
to abolish the NDLS — in the middle of a coal strike — but we should
aim for the present to solve the dispute without ruling out future
change. We mobilized the Civil Contingencies Unit to prepare to meet
the crisis but avoided proclaiming a state of emergency, which might
have meant the use of troops. Any sign of overreaction to the dock
strike would have given the miners and other union militants new
heart. Our strategy had to be to end the dock strike as quickly as
possible, so that the coal dispute could be played as long as was
necessary.
The earliest indications were that the dock strike would prove
extremely difficult. On Monday 16 July I met the General Council of
British Shipping for lunch and I found them in defeatist mood. This
was an instance of something I came to know well: employers were
always advising me to be tough except in their own industry. They
told me that the strike was of greater extent than anything they had
seen before in the docks.
I had called an ad hoc ministerial meeting that evening to review the
overall position and we ran though the options. We recognized that if
picketing spread to ‘non-scheme’ ports there was a high probability
that civil action would be taken against the TGWU, and that there
would be a strong case for activating the NCB’s suspended injunction
against the NUM. The conflict seemed to be on the verge of a
significant escalation.
My recognition of the importance of presentation, however, did lead
me to take a specific initiative, which was to set up a group of junior
ministers from the departments concerned to co-ordinate government
statements during the crisis, under the chairmanship of Tom King,
then Employment Secretary. Peter Walker was not particularly
pleased. He always liked to play his cards very close to his chest and
although he did so with consummate skill there was a risk that one
branch of government would lose confidence or lack proper
information about what we were trying to do. In the end it was a great

success: for once all of us in government contrived to sing the same
song day after day.
In the event the dock strike proved far less of a problem than we
had feared. Whatever the views of their leaders, the ordinary dockers
were simply not prepared to support action which threatened their
jobs: even those at the NDLS ports were less than enthusiastic, fearing
that a strike would hasten the demise of the scheme itself. But the
decisive role was played by the lorry drivers who had an even greater
direct interest in getting goods through and were not prepared to be
bullied and threatened. By 20 July the TGWU had no alternative but
to call off the strike. It had lasted only ten days.
The end of the dock strike was only one of a number of important
developments at this time. Following the fruitless meeting between the
NCB and NUM on 23 May, talks had resumed at the beginning of July.
Our hope was that they would end quickly and that the NCB would
succeed this time in exposing the unreasonableness of Mr Scargill’s
position. There would then be a chance that striking miners would
realize that they had no hope of winning and a return to work would
begin.
However, the talks had drifted on, and there were indications that
the NCB was softening its negotiating position. One problem was that
each new round of negotiations naturally discouraged a return to
work: few would risk going back if a settlement seemed to be in the
offing. More troubling still, there was a real danger that the talks
would end by fudging the issue on the closure of uneconomic pits: a
formula was being developed based upon the proposition that no pit
should be closed if it was capable of being ‘beneficially developed’.
The NCB was also prepared to give a commitment to keep open five
named pits that the NUM had claimed were due for closure. We were
very alarmed. Not only were there ambiguities in the detailed wording
of the proposals, but (far worse) a settlement on these lines would
have given Mr Scargill the chance to claim victory.
But on 18 July, two days before the end of the dock strike,
negotiations collapsed. I have to say I was enormously relieved.
A week later we reached what was for me a very important moment
in the history of the strike, though this was something very few people
knew about at the time. On Wednesday 25 July I held a meeting in
conditions of strict security to discuss power station endurance with
Peter Walker and Sir Walter Marshall, Chairman of the CEGB. That
very day Norman Tebbit had written to me expressing anxiety that
time was not on our side in the coal strike. He had seen estimates of
power station endurance that suggested stocks would be exhausted by
mid-January: if this were so, he argued that we needed as soon as
possible to consider measures to win the strike by the autumn, since
he thought we could not afford to go on to the very brink of
endurance.

I perfectly understood Norman’s concern and it was partly because I
shared his instinctive distrust of the figures — and could not quite
believe Peter Walker’s laid-back optimism — that I had asked for the
meeting with Peter and Walter Marshall. The message I received at the
meeting was extremely encouraging. Walter Marshall confirmed the
position as Peter had previously described it. If supplies of coal from
Nottinghamshire and other working areas to the power stations were
maintained at the present level the safe date for endurance would be
June 1985. In fact, the CEGB believed they could keep the power
stations running until November 1985. He showed me a chart which
demonstrated that coal, nuclear and oil generation taken together
almost exactly matched the (lower) summertime demand. Indeed, if
endurance could be extended into the spring of 1986 — which we
might manage by getting more miners back to work for example — it
would then be possible to go on into the following winter.
However, all these predictions were extremely sensitive to variations
in the supply of coal from the Nottinghamshire pits. Walter Marshall
stressed how important it was to maintain their output. Small
improvements in supplies from these pits increased endurance
dramatically: small shortfalls curtailed it equally dramatically. It
would be essential to maintain transport from the Nottinghamshire
pits and although road transport had made a great contribution,
deliveries by rail could not be dispensed with. Enormous quantities of
coal had to be moved, and pithead stockyards in many of the working
pits were comparatively small — they had been built on the ‘merry-goround’ system, by which trains ran directly to the power stations and
back again on a daily basis. Accordingly, it was vital that we keep the
rail unions working, if necessary at the price of concessions in pay
talks.
Walter Marshall confirmed that importing coal for the power
stations would be a mistake. This would annoy even the
Nottinghamshire miners. It would be better to dedicate imports to
industry and avoid getting the CEGB embroiled in the argument.
Looking to the longer term, he also set out his programme for
increasing endurance to at least twelve months rather than the six
months provided for in the current plans. We never forgot the
possibility of a second strike after the present one was finished.
The combination of Walter Marshall’s natural ebullience, his
mastery of detail and the determination he showed to avoid power
cuts raised my spirits enormously. Over the next couple of days I spoke
individually to Norman Tebbit and several other colleagues to give
them the message. We were all able to take our holidays in a better
frame of mind than we would otherwise have done.
On Tuesday 31 July I spoke in a debate in the House of Commons
on a Censure Motion which the Labour Party had been ill-advised
enough to put down. The debate went far wider than the coal strike.
But the strike was on everyone’s minds and inevitably it was the

exchanges on this matter which caught the public attention. I did not
mince my words:
The Labour Party is the party which supports every strike, no matter what its
pretext, no matter how damaging. But, above all, it is the Labour Party’s
support for the striking miners against the working miners which totally
destroys all credibility for its claim to represent the true interests of working
people in this country.
I went on to deal with Neil Kinnock:
The Leader of the Opposition went silent on the question of a ballot until the
NUM changed its rules to reduce the required majority. Then he told the
House that a national ballot of the NUM was a clearer and closer prospect.
That was on 12 April — the last time that we heard from him on the subject
of a ballot. But on 14 July he appeared at an NUM rally and said, ‘there is no
alternative but to fight: all other roads are shut off.’ What happened to the
ballot?
Answer came there none.

Neil Kinnock had succeeded Michael Foot as Leader of the Labour
Party in October 1983. I faced him across the despatch box of the
House of Commons for seven years. Like Michael Foot, Neil Kinnock
was a gifted orator; but unlike Mr Foot he was no parliamentarian. His
Commons performances were marred by verbosity, a failure to master
facts and technical arguments and, above all, a lack of intellectual
clarity. This last drawback reflected something deeper. Mr Kinnock
was entirely a product of the modern Labour Party — left-wing, close
to the unions, skilful at party management and political manipulation,
basically convinced that Labour’s past defeats resulted from
weaknesses of presentation rather than errors of policy. He regarded
words — whether speeches or the texts of manifestos and policy
documents — as a means of concealing his and the Labour Party’s
socialism rather than of converting others to it. So he forcefully — and
on occasion courageously — denounced Trotskyists and other leftwing troublemakers, not for their brutal tactics or their extreme
revolutionary objectives but because they were an embarrassment to
his and Labour’s ambitions. Being Leader of the Opposition, as I well
remembered, is not an easy assignment. Leading the Labour Party in
Opposition must be a nightmare. But I found it difficult to sympathize
with Mr Kinnock. He was involved in what seemed to me a
fundamentally discreditable enterprise, that of making himself and his
party appear what they were not. The House of Commons and the
electorate found him out. As Opposition Leader he was out of his
depth. As Prime Minister he would have been sunk.
As we entered August we had some reason to hope that the worst of
the strike was behind us. Arthur Scargill and the militants were
becoming increasingly isolated and frustrated. The dock strike had
collapsed. The Government’s attitude and the NCB’s stance were now

generally perceived in a more sympathetic light. The Labour Party was
in disarray. Although the return to work remained a trickle — about
500 during July — there was no sign of any weakening of
determination at the working pits. Finally, on Tuesday 7 August two
Yorkshire miners began a High Court action against the Yorkshire
NUM for striking without a ballot. This proved to be a vital case and
led eventually to the sequestration of the whole of the NUM’s assets.
One sign of the militants’ frustration was an increase in violence
against working miners and their families. The situation appeared to
be under control in Nottinghamshire, but things were getting worse in
Derbyshire, partly because it was more deeply divided and also
because it was closer to the Yorkshire coal fields from which the flying
pickets largely came. Ian MacGregor was in touch with us in No. 10
and with the Home Office. He feared that such intimidation, appalling
in itself, might also slow the return to work and could frighten miners
currently working into staying away. The police thought that there
might have been a change of tactics on the part of the NUM: frustrated
by the failure of mass picketing, perhaps they were taking to guerilla
warfare based on the intimidation of individuals and companies. The
police stepped up their measures to protect the Derbyshire miners:
‘freephone’ lines to police stations were installed; detective squads set
out to counter intimidation; and uniformed policemen patrolled the
villages.
There was also the threat of another dock strike. A tense situation
had developed at Hunterston, the deep-water port in Scotland which
supplied BSC’s Ravenscraig plant. An important cargo of coal, of the
kind necessary for Ravenscraig’s coke ovens, was aboard the bulk
carrier Ostia, presently moored in Belfast Lough. BSC told us that if it
were not landed quickly they would have to start to run down
Ravenscraig. Steel furnaces cannot be shut down fully without
irreversible damage and there was every likelihood that the whole
plant would have to close for good if coal supplies were halted. As
with the earlier dock strike, absurd restrictive practices were the
pretext for the strike threat. The normal operation at Hunterston for
BSC-destined cargo was divided between work done aboard ship by
TGWU registered dockers and work done on-shore by members of the
steel union, the ISTC. But 90 per cent of the cargo could be unloaded
even without ‘trimming’. BSC wanted to use its employees to unload
this coal, but the TGWU was likely to claim that such action was
contrary to the National Dock Labour Board agreement in order to
provoke a new docks dispute. BSC told us that they were prepared to
go to court if the cargo could not be unloaded.
This was a very delicate question and Norman Tebbit stayed in close
contact with BSC. The National Dock Labour Board was asked to offer
a ruling but delayed and, finally, funked the issue altogether. BSC
began the rundown of Ravenscraig on 17 August; they told us that
unless the coal was landed by 23 — 4 August, their furnaces would

have to be ‘banked’ on 28 — 9 August — that is, kept running at a
minimum level, without production. Total closure would follow if coal
supplies did not resume.
In the end, after putting off the decision as long as possible, BSC had
its employees start unloading the Ostia on the morning of Thursday 23
August. Although BSC acted in conformity with a local port agreement
of 1984, TGWU dockers immediately walked out and the union called
a second national dock strike.
But in Scotland public opinion was strongly opposed to any action
that threatened the future of Ravenscraig. So we had doubts whether
the union could sustain a strike across the whole of Scotland, let alone
in the United Kingdom as a whole. And we were right. This strike was
to cause us much less worry than the first. Though to begin with the
strike received considerable support from registered dockers, a
majority of ports remained open. Finally, the TGWU called it off on 18
September.
On holiday in Switzerland and Austria between 9 and 27 August I
followed the story of the Ostia by telex. In my absence, Peter Walker
took effective charge of day-to-day policy in the coal strike. But a
prime minister is never really on holiday. I found myself accompanied
by the local ambassador, who had previously been one of my private
secretaries, five ‘Garden Room girls’ on duty round the clock, a
technician to superintend communications with Downing Street and
the usual roster of detectives. Red boxes came through the ‘diplomatic
bag’. The telex chattered constantly. At least one important decision
was demanded of me by Willie Whitelaw over the telephone. Clarissa
Eden once said that she sometimes felt that the Suez Canal flowed
through her dining-room at No. 10. I sometimes thought at the end of
the day that I would look out of the window and see a couple of
Yorkshire miners striding down the Swiss slopes. And somehow
neither the beautiful mountain scenery nor even my favourite reading
— thrillers by Frederick Forsyth and John Le Carré — provided a
distraction.
On my return I found the situation much as I had left it, though with
one — as it was to turn out — fateful exception. There was a good
deal of violence and intimidation still going on. By now 5,897 arrests
had been made in the course of the dispute; there had been 1,039
convictions, the most severe sentence being nine months’
imprisonment. Stipendiary magistrates would sit for the first time in
early September at Rotherham and Doncaster. Others were ready
elsewhere. Labour’s Energy spokesman, Stan Orme, was trying to
mediate in the coal strike, which served perhaps more to minimize
Labour embarrassment than to bring the end of the dispute any closer.
Robert Maxwell was also trying to muscle in. He announced in early
September that he was holding himself ready to mediate, but the
whole thing collapsed in recrimination before the two sides had even
met. The NUM blamed the Government.

FROM THE JAWS OF VICTORY?
The most serious development, however, had been a circular issued on
15 August by the NCB to members of the National Association of
Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers (NACODS). By law coal
could only be mined in the presence of suitably qualified safety
personnel — the great majority of whom were members of NACODS.
In April, NACODS members voted to strike, but the margin was less
than the two-thirds required by union rules. Up to mid-August the
NCB had varied in its policy towards NACODS: in some areas members
were being allowed to stay away from striking pits where no work was
being done, in others they were being required to cross picket lines.
The NCB circular now generalized the latter policy, threatening to
withhold pay from NACODS members who refused to comply.
The NCB circular played into the hands of those leaders of NACODS,
particularly its president, who were strongly sympathetic to the NUM.
Here at last was an issue on which they could persuade their members
to strike. It was easy to understand why the NCB acted as they did. But
it was a major error, subsequently compounded by their failure to
perceive the swing in favour of a strike among NACODS members, and
it almost precipitated disaster.
September and October were always likely to be difficult months.
The miners would be looking forward to the winter when demand for
electricity was at its highest and power cuts most likely. At the TUC
Conference in early September a majority of trade unions — strongly
opposed by the electricity and power workers — pledged support for
the miners, though in most cases they had no intention of giving it.
When the forthright electricians’ leader Eric Hammond made a
powerful speech pointing this out, he was heavily barracked for his
pains. Neil Kinnock also spoke at the conference, coming as near as he
ever did to outright condemnation of picket line violence, but without
taking any action to expel from his party those who supported it.
Meanwhile, Mr Scargill reaffirmed his view that there was no such
thing as an uneconomic pit, only pits which had been starved of the
necessary investment.
Negotiations between the NCB and the NUM were resumed on 9
September. As arguments continued about forms of words, it was
difficult for the general public to work out precisely what separated
the two parties. I was always concerned that Ian MacGregor and the
NCB team would unwittingly give away basic principles for which the
strike was being fought. In the July talks he had already moved from
the principle of closing ‘uneconomic’ pits to the much more dubious
concept of closing pits which could not be ‘beneficially developed’.
Thankfully, Mr Scargill had not been prepared to adopt this ambiguous
objective. Peter Walker and I felt throughout that Ian MacGregor did
not fully comprehend the devious ruthlessness of the NUM leaders he

was arguing with. He was a businessman, not a politician, and thought
in terms of reasonableness and reaching a deal. I suspect that Mr
MacGregor’s view was that once he got the miners back to work he
would be able to restructure the industry as he wished, whatever the
precise terms on which a settlement had been reached. The rest of us,
from long experience, understood that Arthur Scargill and his friends
would exploit a fudged formula and that we should be back where we
started. It was crucial for the future of the industry and for the future
of the country itself that the NUM’s claim that uneconomic pits should
never be closed should be defeated, and be seen to be defeated, and
the use of strikes for political purposes discredited once and for all.
It was also in September that I first met in person members of the
‘Miners’ Wives Back to Work Campaign’, whose representatives came
to see me at 10 Downing Street. I was moved by the courage of these
women, whose families were subject to the abuse and intimidation.
They told me a great deal and confirmed some of my suspicions about
the NCB’s handling of the strike. They said that the majority of miners
still did not understand the full extent of the NCB’s pay offer and plans
for investment: more needed to be done to put across the NCB’s case to
striking miners, many of whom relied on the NUM for their
information. They confirmed that while talks between the NCB and the
NUM were going on, or were in prospect, it was extremely difficult to
persuade men to return to work. They explained to me how small
shops in the coalfields were being blackmailed into supplying food and
goods for striking miners and withholding them from working miners.
But perhaps the most shocking thing they had to say was that local
NCB management in some areas were not anxious to promote a return
to work and in one particular area were actively siding with the NUM
to discourage it. In this overunionized industry I found that all too
likely.
Of course, the vital thing for these women was that the NCB should
do everything it could to protect miners who had led the return to
work, if necessary transferring them to pits where there were fewer
militants and giving them priority in applications for redundancies. I
said that we would not let them down, and I think I kept my word.
The whole country was in their debt.
One working miner’s wife, Mrs McGibbon from Kent, spoke at the
Conservative Party Conference, describing the harrowing experiences
which she and her family had undergone. The vile tactics of the
strikers knew no limit. Even her small children were targets: they were
told that their parents were going to be killed. Shortly after she had
spoken the Morning Star published her address. A week later her home
was attacked.
On 11 September the National Working Miners’ Committee was
formed. This was an important development in the history of the
working miners’ movement. I heard a good deal informally about what
was happening on the ground through David Hart, a friend who was

making great efforts to help the working miners. I was eager to learn
everything I could.
On Wednesday 26 September I went to York. I visited the Minster,
which had recently been struck by lightning and badly damaged in the
fire which followed — divine punishment, some suggested, for the
wayward theology of leading Anglican clerics. I also discussed with
the Yorkshire police and local people the damage the strike was doing
to the local community. At lunch with Conservative Party activists,
some of those from Barnsley confirmed the impression that we had
received throughout the strike: that the NCB’s publicity of its case was
truly dreadful. There were, too, the accounts of intimidation with
which I had become all too familiar. Nor could one doubt the
economic hardship which Mr Scargill’s obduracy was imposing on his
own supporters. I was told that miners were digging up rootcrops from
the fields to feed themselves and their families.
One positive result of the visit was my meeting with Michael Eaton,
Director of the NCB’s North Yorkshire area and the man who had
developed the new pit at Selby.
I heard again in York, as I had from advisers previously, how
effective he was. He has a wonderful soft Yorkshire voice and a good
way of explaining things, so I suggested his appointment as a national
spokesman to help improve NCB’s presentation. Mr Eaton did a fine
job, though unfortunately his position was made difficult as a result of
jealousy and obstruction elsewhere in the NCB’s ranks.
Meanwhile the threat from NACODS crept up on us. The leadership
of NACODS was now clearly intent on a strike and announced that a
strike ballot was to be held on 28 September. An agreement on the
outstanding issues seemed within reach at one point but was
repudiated by the union president on his return from holiday. At first
the NCB was optimistic about the result of the ballot, but ominously as
the days went by their assessments grew less and less hopeful. I had a
meeting with Ian MacGregor and Peter Walker at Chequers on Sunday
23 September and we discussed what would happen if the two-thirds
majority required for a strike was obtained. It was possible that
NACODS might just use the result to put pressure on the NCB
management to resolve their grievances. Alternatively, they might call
a strike. We thought that in that event NACODS men in areas where
the mines were working would themselves remain at work. But there
was little chance of this happening in borderline areas like Derbyshire
and it was clear that a NACODS strike would make it even more
difficult to bring about a return to work by miners in the more militant
areas. NACODS men were not the only NCB employees with the
necessary safety qualifications. Many members of the British
Association of Colliery Managers (BACM) were also qualified, but it
would be difficult to persuade them to go underground and perform
these tasks in the face of NACODS hostility. And while there were
some NUM members who had passed the requisite examinations and

were awaiting promotion to safety work grades, they too could
provide only limited cover.
On Tuesday 25 September Peter Walker told the ministerial group
on coal that it now looked likely that NACODS would vote for a strike.
He was right: when the result came through on Friday we discovered
that 82.5 per cent had voted in favour.
This was very bad news. Throughout the coal strike events swung
unpredictably in one direction then another — suddenly things would
move our way, then equally suddenly move against us — and I could
never let myself feel confident about the final outcome.
Apart from the initial few days of the strike in March, this was the
time when we felt most concern. Some in Whitehall feared that a
bandwaggon might begin to roll in Mr Scargill’s favour. We could not
know what effect the TUC resolution of support for the NUM would
have. We were now approaching the autumn and the militants might
gain new heart. And there was the threatened NACODS strike.
It was suggested to us that most members of NACODS had voted for
a strike in order to strengthen their leadership’s negotiating hand and
that the vote did not mean that a strike would inevitably take place.
After the ballot the NACODS executive had announced a nine-day
delay before industrial action would actually begin, lending some
plausibility to this interpretation. But for most of the leadership itself
the original dispute about crossing picket lines was a secondary
matter; their real aim was to secure an end to the miners’ strike on the
NUM’s terms. Our best chance of avoiding a strike by NACODS — or
of minimizing its effects if one could not be avoided — would be to
drive a wedge between the union leaders and their members. It was
therefore vital that the NCB should be as conciliatory as possible on
the points of substance.
The NCB and NACODS held talks on Monday 1 October. Agreement
was reached on pay and on guidelines as regards crossing picket lines,
the NCB withdrawing its circular of 15 August. The following day
there were discussions on machinery for the review of pit closures and
the possibility of some form of arbitration in cases of disagreement.
This was to remain the most difficult question. No matter how
elaborate the process of consultation, the NCB could not concede to a
third party the right of ultimate decision over pit closures. This,
although generally understood, was best not set out too starkly.
All this time we were faced with hostile outside comment and
pressure. The Labour Party Conference wholeheartedly backed the
NUM and condemned the police. Worst of all, perhaps, was Neil
Kinnock’s speech in which, under pressure from the left wing and
trade unions, he retreated from the tougher line he had taken at the
TUC Conference. He took refuge in a general condemnation of
violence which made no distinction between the use of violence with
the aim of breaking the law and the use of force to uphold it. He even

contrived to equate violence and intimidation with the social ills from
which he claimed Britain was suffering: ‘the violence of despair … of
long-term unemployment … loneliness, decay and ugliness’. No
wonder that the Labour Party lost so much support in
Nottinghamshire, where miners and their families knew what violence
really was, even if the Leader of the Labour Party did not.
As always, the Conservative Party Conference followed straight on
from Labour’s. Much of my time at Brighton was spent following as
best I could the course of negotiations between the NUM and the NCB
at the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS). A
delegation from NACODS was also present at ACAS, though not
directly involved in the negotiations. It was clear that NACODS was
trying to win terms for the NUM which would have allowed Mr
Scargill to claim victory. NACODS leaders were making threats with
this in mind, claiming that their members could not be restrained
much longer from beginning their strike and so on. Tactics became at
this stage of the greatest importance. The NCB tabled a paper which
accepted an independent review body on pit closures and they
committed themselves to give proper consideration to its views,
though obviously they would retain the right to take management
decisions. ACAS then put forward a variation on this which the NCB
immediately accepted and the NUM promptly rejected. We were still
not to know how NACODS would react. But for once the NCB had
obtained an important tactical advantage in negotiations.
These discussions spanned our Party Conference. Leon Brittan and
Peter Walker both delivered powerful defences of our position during
it. But the event which dominated our thoughts at that time was the
IRA bomb at the Grand Hotel which killed five of our friends and came
near to killing me, members of the Cabinet and many others. *
Among the messages I received afterwards was one from Mrs
Gandhi, whom I knew well and admired. Within three weeks she was
the victim of a brutal assassination by two of her own bodyguards.
THE TIDE TURNS
Towards the end of October the situation changed sharply once again.
Three events within a week were particularly hopeful for us and must
have come as hammerblows to Mr Scargill. First, on Tuesday 24
October the NACODS executive agreed not to strike after all. Precisely
what happened is unclear. In all probability the moderates on the
executive convinced the hardliners that their members simply would
not act as stooges for Mr Scargill.
Second, it was at this point that the civil law at last began to bite. I
have already mentioned a case which had been brought against the
NUM by two Yorkshire miners: the High Court had ruled in the two
miners’ favour that the strike in Yorkshire could not be described as

‘official’. The NUM had ignored the ruling and as a result a writ had
been served on an astonished Mr Scargill actually on the floor of the
Labour Party Conference. On 10 October both he and the union had
been found in contempt of court and fined £1,000 and £200,000
respectively. Mr Scargill’s fine was paid anonymously, but the NUM
refused to pay and the High Court ordered its assets to be
sequestrated. It soon became evident that the NUM had prepared for
this event, but the financial pressure on the union was now intense
and its ability to organize was greatly hampered.
Finally, on Sunday 28 October — only three days after the
sequestration order — the Sunday Times revealed that an official of the
NUM had visited Libya and made a personal appeal to Colonel Gaddafi
for his support. This was astonishing news and even Mr Scargill’s
friends were dismayed. At the beginning of October, Mr Scargill
(travelling under an alias as ‘Mr Smith’) had visited Paris with his
colleague Mr Roger Windsor to meet representatives of the French
communist trade union, the CGT. Present at the meeting was a Libyan
whom Mr Scargill later claimed to be a representative of Libyan trade
unionists — a rare breed, in fact, since Colonel Gaddafi had dissolved
all trade unions when he came to power in 1969. It seems likely that
Colonel Gaddafi made a donation to the NUM, though the amount is
uncertain. The sum of £150,000 has been suggested. Mr Windsor’s
visit to Libya was a follow-up to the Paris meeting.
A further sum was certainly received from an equally unlikely
source: the nonexistent ‘trade unions’ of Soviet-controlled Afghanistan.
And in September reports had begun to surface that the NUM was
receiving assistance from Soviet miners — a group whose members
would have looked with envy on the freedoms, incomes and working
conditions of their British equivalents. There was further confirmation
in November. It was quite clear that these initiatives had the support
of the Soviet Government. Otherwise the Soviet miners would not
have had access to convertible currency. Our displeasure at this was
made very clear to the Soviet Ambassador and I raised the matter with
Mr Gorbachev when he visited Britain for the first time in December,
who claimed to be unaware of it.*
All this did the NUM’s cause great harm, not least with other trade
unionists. The British people have plenty of sympathy for someone
fighting for his job, but very little for anyone who seeks help from
foreign powers out to destroy his country’s freedom.
In November the ground continued to slip from under the NUM
leadership. The NCB seized the moment to launch a drive to encourage
the return to work. It was announced that miners who were back at
work on Monday 19 November would qualify for a substantial
Christmas bonus. The NCB mounted a direct mail campaign to draw
the attention of striking miners to the offer. Combined with the
growing disillusionment with Mr Scargill, this had an immediate
effect. In the first week after the offer 2,203 miners returned to work,

six times more than in the previous week. The most significant return
to work was in North Derbyshire. Our strategy was to let this trend
continue without trying to take any explicit political credit for it,
which could have been counter-productive. I told ministers that the
figures should be allowed to speak for themselves, but that we should
continue to emphasize just how much was on offer. I was keen to
bring it home to the public that, in spite of all Mr Scargill’s efforts, the
trend was now firmly in the right direction.
Speaking at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet on Monday 12 November I
said:
The Government will hold firm. The Coal Board can go no further. Day by
day, responsible men and women are distancing themselves from this strike.
Miners are asserting their right to go to their place of work. Those in other
unions now see clearly the true nature and purpose of those who are leading
this strike.
This has been a tragic strike but good will emerge from it. The courage
and loyalty of working miners and their families will never be forgotten.
Their example will advance the cause of moderate and reasonable trade
unionism everywhere. When the strike ends it will be their victory.

In fact, I remained in touch with representatives of the working
miners. I was keen to see them but there appeared to be some rivalry
between two groups: to have seen one without the other would have
caused resentment and to have seen both together would have been
undiplomatic. I accepted Peter Walker’s advice to this effect, but I told
my Private Office that when the strike was over I would have
representatives of all the working miners and their wives to No. 10 for
a reception — which indeed I did. (I met some also at a private buffet
hosted by Woodrow Wyatt at the end of March the following year.)
Like many others, I suspect, I had been impelled to reflect a great
deal in the course of the strike on the threats to democracy. Back in
July I had addressed an eve of recess meeting of the ‘22 Committee on
the subject of the ‘enemy within’. The speech had attracted a good
deal of hostile comment: critics had tried to distort my meaning by
suggesting that the phrase was a reference to the miners at large
rather than the minority of Marxist militants, as I had intended. I
returned to the theme in the Carlton Lecture, which I delivered in the
traditional home of Conservatism — the Carlton Club — on the
evening of Monday 26 November. I was the second Carlton lecturer:
the first had been Harold Macmillan, who had recently attacked our
handling of the miners’ strike in a characteristically elegant maiden
speech in the Lords. Of course, in contemplating the threat of antidemocratic extremism I had in mind not only the NUM leadership but
also the terrorists, who had demonstrated their murderous intent at
the Brighton Grand Hotel just weeks before. I reflected:
There has come into existence a fashionable view, convenient to many
special interest groups, that there is no need to accept the verdict of the
majority: that the minority should be quite free to bully, even coerce, to get
the verdict reversed. Marxists, of course, always had an excuse when they

were outvoted: their opponents must have ‘false consciousness’: their views
didn’t really count. But the Marxists, as usual, only provide a bogus
intellectual top-dressing for groups who seek only their own self-interest.
… Now that democracy has been won, it is not heroic to flout the law of
the land as if we still struggled in a quagmire where civilization had yet to
be built. The concept of fair play — a British way of saying ‘respect for the
rules’ — must not be used to allow the minority to overbear the tolerant
majority. Yet these are the very dangers which we face in Britain today. At
one end of the spectrum are the terrorist gangs within our borders, and the
terrorist states which finance and arm them. At the other are the hard Left
operating inside our system, conspiring to use union power and the
apparatus of local government to break, defy and subvert the laws.

The return to work continued. But so did the violence. Violence and
intimidation well away from the pitheads were more difficult for the
police to prevent and required fewer people to perpetrate:
consequently it was on such tactics that the militant miners now
concentrated. There were many incidents. One that particularly struck
me took place on Friday 23 November when Michael Fletcher, a
working miner from Pontefract in Yorkshire, was attacked and beaten
by a gang of miners in his own home. No fewer than nineteen men
were arrested for the crime. Then a week later came one of the most
appalling events of the strike: a three-foot concrete post was thrown
from a motorway bridge onto a taxi carrying a South Wales miner to
work. The driver, David Wilkie, was killed. I wondered whether there
was any limit to the savagery of which these people were capable.
With the passing of the 19 November deadline for the Christmas
bonus the return to work slowed somewhat. One of the wives of the
working miners sent me a message explaining that there were two
additional reasons. First, some striking miners who intended to go
back to work would only return after Christmas, to avoid intimidation
of their families over the holiday. Second, there was news of fresh
talks being planned between the NUM and the NCB, and talks always
had a negative effect on the movement back to work.
But further talks were difficult to avoid, although Mr Scargill’s
intransigence would probably ensure that they went nowhere. Using
Robert Maxwell as an intermediary, key figures in the TUC were
anxious to find some way of concluding the strike which would allow
Mr Scargill and the militants to save face. In fact, of course, it was
only by ensuring that they lost face and were seen to be defeated and
rejected by their own people that we could tame the militants. I
suspect that some of the union leaders knew this. Certainly, some of
them had reason to know it. Norman Willis, General Secretary of the
TUC, had pursued a thoroughly honourable line throughout, unlike the
leaders of the Labour Party. Earlier that month he had spoken at an
NUM rally in South Wales. Attempts were made to shout him down
when he condemned violence on the picket line and in a chilling
moment, which I and millions of others watched on television, a noose
was lowered from the ceiling and suspended just above his head.

David Basnett, General Secretary of the GMWU, and Ray Buckton,
General Secretary of ASLEF, had a private meeting with Peter Walker
in which they revealed their desire for the TUC to play a role. I
considered how we should respond. On the one hand, the last thing I
wanted was to bring the TUC into No. 10 in their old capacity as
power brokers. On the other hand, a clumsy rebuff could alienate
moderate opinion among the unions.
So Peter Walker and Tom King had a lengthy meeting with seven of
the main union leaders on the evening of Wednesday 5 December. It
was clear that none of the seven really had any idea how to end the
strike. I discussed how to deal with the TUC initiative with Peter
Walker and officials on the morning of Thursday 13 December at
Downing Street. Apparently the TUC were proposing to put to the
NUM and the NCB the idea of a return to work followed by discussion
of a new Plan for Coal, the talks to have a time limit of perhaps eight
to twelve weeks. The TUC wanted to know whether we would endorse
this approach. Peter Walker saw some advantages in it. I was more
conscious of the difficulties. There were three principles, I said, to
which we must adhere. First, any talks on the future of the industry
must take place after the return to work. Second, nothing should be
agreed which would undercut the position of the working miners.
Third, it was essential to prevent the NUM claiming that the
programme of pit closures had been withdrawn or even that there
would be no pit closures while talks continued. It should be clearly
seen that the NCB was free to operate the existing colliery review
procedure, as modified by the provisions of the agreement with
NACODS. However, I agreed that Peter should meet the TUC on Friday
morning to tell them that the Government would go along with their
efforts to bring the strike to an end on the basis of a return to work
followed by talks on the future of the industry. The colliery review
procedure, modified by the NACODS agreement, would remain in
place.
Peter and Tom met the TUC delegation the following day. Nothing
came of the meeting. The TUC had no authority from Mr Scargill to
negotiate and they concluded that no initiative to end the strike was
now possible before Christmas.
As the year ended, our main objective was to encourage a further
return to work from 7 January, the first working Monday in the New
Year. Though the NCB’s bonus offer had expired, there was still a
strong financial incentive for strikers to return to work in the near
future because they would pay little, if any, income tax on their wages
if they went back before the end of the tax year on 31 March. The
great strategic prize would be to get more than 50 per cent of NUM
members back to work: if we could secure that, it would be equivalent
in practical and presentational terms to a vote in a national ballot to
end the strike. This would require the return of a further 15,000 to
work, which the NCB were busily preparing a new campaign of letters

and press advertising to achieve.
It was also vital that the miners and the public at large should be
told that there would be no power cuts that winter, contrary to Mr
Scargill’s ever more desperate and incredible predictions. We held off
making such an announcement until we could be absolutely certain,
but finally on 29 December Peter Walker was able to issue a statement
saying that he had been informed by the Chairman of the CEGB that at
the level of coal production that had now been achieved there would
be no power cuts during the whole of 1985.
THE STRIKE BEGINS TO CRUMBLE
The question now was what the effect of all this would be on the
return to work in January. The rate of return was initially affected in
some areas by bad weather, which also had some negative effects on
the movement of coal. (I had been worried earlier that we would have
a cold winter, but fortunately the weather was generally good.) But as
January continued the rate of return increased. By the middle of the
month there were almost 75,000 NUM members not on strike and the
rate of return was running at about 2,500 a week. Plainly the end was
near.
The pattern which seemed to be emerging was for working miners
to establish a ‘bridgehead’ at a strike-bound pit: fifty or more of those
most anxious to return would go in together, often on a Thursday or
Friday when their action attracted least attention. After that things
could move quite fast. The increase in production was bound to be
slower than the rate of return to work, but the trend there was also
clearly in the right direction.
The one thing which could be relied upon to slow down the progress
was further negotiations: and so it proved. When news broke of ‘talks
about talks’, which were arranged between the NCB and the NUM on
Monday 21 January, the effect was to cut the rate of return to rather
less than half that of the previous week.
Meanwhile, public attention increasingly focused on the attempts of
the sequestrators to trace and recover NUM funds which had been
transferred abroad. In early December further legal action by working
miners had led to the removal of the NUM’s trustees and the
appointment of an official receiver. These were, of course, principally
questions for the courts. However, even with the full armoury of the
law, there were such difficulties in tracing the funds that the
sequestrators might not even have been able to cover their costs.
Accordingly, Michael Havers told the Commons on Tuesday 11
December that the Government would indemnify them against the
loss. We could not stand by and see the intention of the court
frustrated. We were also involved in trying to ensure maximum cooperation from foreign governments — Ireland and Luxemburg — in

whose jurisdictions the NUM had lodged its money. Towards the end
of January some £5 million was recovered.
If the position of Mr Scargill looked hopeless, that of the Labour
Party looked ridiculous. There was another Censure Debate in the
House of Commons at this time in which I spoke for the Government.
As on the previous occasion I challenged Mr Kinnock to tell us where
he stood, even if belatedly:
Throughout the strike the Rt. Hon. Gentleman has had the choice between
standing up to the NUM leadership and keeping silent. He has kept silent.
When the leadership of the NUM called a strike without a ballot, in defiance
of union rules, the Rt. Hon. Gentleman stayed silent. When pickets tried by
violence to close down pits in Nottinghamshire and elsewhere, against the
democratically expressed wishes of the local miners, the Rt. Hon. Gentleman
stayed silent. When the NUM tried to impose mob rule at Orgreave, the Rt.
Hon. Gentleman stayed silent. Only when the General Secretary of the TUC
had the courage to tell the leadership of the NUM that its tactics were
unacceptable did the Rt. Hon. Gentleman take on the role of Little Sir Echo
… I challenge the Leader of the Opposition. Will he urge the NUM to accept
that agreement or will he not? [Hon. Members: ‘Answer!’] He will not
answer, because he dare not answer.

The real question now was how and when would the strike end. In
early February the numbers returning to work were again down
because of the prospect of a resumption of talks. The TUC continued to
seek to act as an intermediary between the NCB and the NUM. By this
time, the NCB had rightly deduced that in negotiations they should put
everything on paper so that there was less chance of the NUM
leadership distorting it for their own tactical advantage. For his part,
Mr Scargill continued to confirm in public that he would not agree to
the closure of pits on economic grounds. Not surprisingly, working
miners and their families were worried and perplexed by the
continuing talk of negotiations. On Monday 4 February I wrote to the
wife of a working miner to reassure her:
I do understand your fear that the NUM leadership may yet evade
responsibility for the misery they have caused — but I believe that the Coal
Board have been, and are being, resolute about their position. For my part, I
have made clear that there can be no fudging of the central issue, and no
betrayal of the working miners to whom we owe so much …

By this time, the NUM leadership could have no doubt about how
far events had swung against them since the NACODS dispute the
previous autumn. The NACODS leaders now began to press the NCB to
resume negotiations and so assist the NUM. But, learning from past
mistakes, the NCB avoided giving NACODS any excuse for a renewed
threat of industrial action.
The TUC leaders also remained anxious to save the militants from
humiliating defeat. But Mr Scargill clearly had no intention of
budging: indeed he had already stated publicly that he would prefer a
return to work without an agreement to acceptance of the NCB’s
proposals. For its part, the NCB had told the TUC that there was no

basis for negotiation on the terms still demanded by the NUM. I
recognized that, although their motives were decidedly mixed, the
TUC leaders and particularly the General Secretary had been acting in
good faith. They must have realized by now that there was no
possibility of doing business with Mr Scargill. Consequently, when a
delegation from the TUC asked to see me, I agreed.
I met Norman Willis and other union leaders at No. 10 on the
morning of Tuesday 19 February. Willie Whitelaw, Peter Walker and
Tom King joined me on the Government side. The meeting was good
natured. Norman Willis put as fair a construction on the NUM’s
negotiating stance as anyone could. In reply I said that I appreciated
the TUC’s efforts. I too wanted to see the strike settled as soon as
possible. But this required a clear resolution of the central issues of the
dispute. It was in no one’s interest to end the strike with an unclear
formula: arguments about interpretation and accusations of bad faith
could provide the basis for another dispute. I could not agree with Mr
Willis that there was evidence of a significant shift in the NUM
executive’s position. I gave an assurance that the NACODS agreement
would be fully honoured and that I saw no difficulties about
implementing it. An effective settlement of the dispute required clear
understandings about procedures for closure, acknowledgement of the
NCB’s right to manage and to make the final decisions, and an
acknowledgement that the Board would take the economic
performance of pits into account when those decisions were made.
THE END OF THE STRIKE
It was now evident to the miners and to the public that the TUC were
neither willing nor able to stop events taking their course. Large
numbers of miners were going back to work and the rate of return was
increasing. On Wednesday 27 February the magic figure was reached:
more than half the members of the NUM were now not on strike. On
Sunday 3 March an NUM Delegates’ Conference voted for a return to
work, against Mr Scargill’s advice, and over the next few days even the
most militant areas returned. That Sunday I gave an interview to
reporters outside No. 10. I was asked who if anyone had won. I
replied:
If anyone has won, it has been the miners who stayed at work, the dockers
who stayed at work, the power workers who stayed at work, the lorry drivers
who stayed at work, the railwaymen who stayed at work, the managers who
stayed at work. In other words, all of those people who kept the wheels of
Britain turning and who, in spite of a strike, actually produced a record
output in Britain last year. It is the whole working people of Britain who
kept Britain going.

And so the strike ended. It had lasted almost exactly a year. Even
now we could not be sure that the militants would not find some new
excuse to call a strike the following winter. So we took steps to rebuild

coal and oil stocks and continued to watch events in the coal industry
with the closest attention. I was particularly concerned about the
dangers faced by the working miners and their families now that the
spotlight had moved away from the pithead villages. In May I met Ian
MacGregor to emphasize how vital it was that they should receive the
necessary consideration and support.
As an industrial dispute the coal strike had been wholly
unnecessary. The NUM’s position throughout the strike — that
uneconomic pits could not be closed — was totally unreasonable.
Never while I was Prime Minister did any other group make a similar
demand, let alone strike for it. Only in a totalitarian state with a siege
economy — with nationalization, the direction of labour and import
barriers — could the coal industry have functioned, even for a time,
irrespective of financial realities and the forces of competition. But for
people like Mr Scargill these were desirable things. The impossibility
of the NUM’s policy on pit closures is a further clue — as if public
statements were not enough — to the real nature of the strike itself.
The strike certainly established the truth that the British coal
industry could not remain immune to the economic forces which
applied elsewhere in both the public and private sectors. In spite of
heavy investment, British coal has proved unable to compete on world
markets and as a result the British coal industry has now shrunk far
more than any of us thought it would at the time of the strike. *
Yet the coal strike was always about far more than uneconomic pits.
It was a political strike. And so its outcome had a significance far
beyond the economic sphere. From 1972 to 1985 the conventional
wisdom was that Britain could only be governed with the consent of
the trade unions. No government could really resist, still less defeat, a
major strike; in particular a strike by the miners’ union. Even as we
were reforming trade union law and overcoming lesser disputes, such
as the steel strike, many on the left and outside it continued to believe
that the miners had the ultimate veto and would one day use it. That
day had now come and gone. Our determination to resist a strike
emboldened the ordinary trade unionist to defy the militants. What the
strike’s defeat established was that Britain could not be made
ungovernable by the Fascist Left. Marxists wanted to defy the law of
the land in order to defy the laws of economics. They failed, and in
doing so demonstrated just how mutually dependent the free economy
and a free society really are. It is a lesson no one should forget.
*
*

See pp. 139 — 43.
See pp. 379 — 83.

In fact, I have since seen documentary evidence suggesting that he knew full well and
was among those who authorized payment.
*
*

See pp. 685 — 6.

CHAPTER XIV

Shadows of Gunmen
The political and security response to IRA
terrorism…1979–1990

THE BRIGHTON BOMB
As usual, by the end of the week of our 1984 Party Conference in
Brighton I was becoming frantic about my speech. A good conference
speech cannot just be written in advance: you need to get the feel of
the conference in order to achieve the right tone. I spent as much time
as I could working on the text with my speech writers on Thursday
afternoon and evening, rushed away to look in at the Conservative
Agents’ Ball and returned to my suite at the Grand Hotel just after 11
o’clock.
By about 2.40 a.m. the speech…at least from my point of view…was
finished. So while the speech writers themselves, who had been joined
for a time by Norman Tebbit, went to bed, my long-suffering staff
typed in what I was (fairly) confident would be the final changes to
the text and prepared the Autocue tape. Meanwhile, I got on with
some government business.
At 2.50 a.m. Robin Butler asked me to look at one last official
paper…it was about the Liverpool Garden Festival. I gave Robin my
view and he began to put away the papers. At 2.54 a.m. a loud thud
shook the room. There was a few seconds’ silence and then there was a
second slightly different noise, in fact created by falling masonry. I
knew immediately that it was a bomb…perhaps two bombs, a large
followed by a smaller device…but at this stage I did not know that the
explosion had taken place inside the hotel. Glass from the windows of
my sitting-room was strewn across the carpet. But I thought that it
might be a car bomb outside. (I only realized that the bomb had
exploded above us when Penny, John Gummer’s wife, appeared a little
later from upstairs, still in her night clothes.) The adjoining bathroom
was more severely damaged, though the worst I would have suffered
had I been in there were minor cuts. Those who had sought to kill me
had placed the bomb in the wrong place.
Apart from the broken glass and a ringing fire alarm, set off by the
explosion, there was a strange and, as it turned out, deceptive
normality. The lights, thankfully, remained on: the importance of this
played on my mind for some time and for months afterwards I always
kept a torch by my bed when I was staying the night in a strange
house. Denis put his head round the bedroom door, saw that I was all
right and went back inside to dress. For some reason neither of us

quite understands he took a spare pair of shoes with him, subsequently
worn by Charles Price, the American Ambassador, who had lost his in
the confusion of leaving the hotel. While Crawfie gathered together
my vanity case, blouses and two suits…one for the next day…Robin
Butler came in to take charge of the government papers. I went across
the landing to the secretaries’ room to see if my staff were all right.
One of the girls had received a nasty electric shock from the
photocopier. But otherwise all was well. They were as concerned
about my still only partly typed-up speech as they were for
themselves. ‘It’s all right,’ they assured me, ‘we’ve got the speech.’ A
copy went straight into my briefcase.
By now more and more people were appearing in the secretaries’
room with me…the Gummers, the Howes, David Wolfson, Michael
Alison and others, unkempt, anxious but quite calm. At this stage none
of us had any clear idea about the extent of the damage, let alone
injuries. While we talked, my detectives had been checking out as best
they could our immediate security. There is always a fear of a second
device, carefully timed to catch and kill those fleeing from the first
explosion. It was also necessary for them to find a way out of the hotel
which was both unblocked and safe.
At 3.10 a.m., in groups, we began to leave. It turned out that the
first route suggested was impassable and we were turned back by a
fireman. So we went back and waited in the office. Later we were told
that it was safe to leave and we went down by the main staircase. It
was now that I first saw from the rubble in the entrance and foyer
something of the seriousness of the blast. I hoped that the porter had
not been injured. The air was full of thick cement dust: it was in my
mouth and covered my clothes as I clambered over discarded
belongings and broken furniture towards the back entrance of the
hotel. It still never occurred to me that anyone would have died.
Ten minutes later Denis, Crawfie and I arrived in a police car at
Brighton Police Station. We were given tea in the Chief Constable’s
room. Soon friends and colleagues started to arrive to see me. Willie
Whitelaw came in. So did the Howes, accompanied by their little dog
‘Budget’. But it was Leon Brittan, as Home Secretary, and John
Gummer, as Party Chairman, with whom I had most to discuss. At this
stage none of us knew whether the conference could continue: had the
conference hall itself been attacked? But I was already determined that
if it was physically possible to do so I would deliver my speech. There
was discussion about whether I should return to No. 10; but I said,
‘No: I am staying.’ It was eventually decided that I would spend the
rest of the night at Lewes Police College. I changed out of evening
dress into a navy suit and, as I left the Police Station with Denis and
Crawfie, I made a brief statement to the press. Then we were driven at
great speed to Lewes.
Nobody spoke during the journey. Our thoughts were back at the
Grand Hotel. Whether by chance or arrangement, there was no one

staying at the College. I was given a small sitting-room with a
television and a twin-bedded room with its own bathroom. Denis and
the detectives shared rooms further down the corridor. Crawfie and I
shared too. We sat on our beds and speculated about what had
happened. By now I was convinced that there must have been
casualties. But we could get no news.
I could only think of one thing to do. Crawfie and I knelt by the side
of our beds and prayed for some time in silence.
I had brought no night clothes with me and so I lay down fully
clothed and slept fitfully for perhaps an hour and a half. I awoke to
the sound of the breakfast television news at 6.30 a.m. The news was
bad, much worse than I had feared. I saw pictures of Norman Tebbit
being pulled out of the rubble. Then came the news that Roberta
Wakeham and Anthony Berry MP were dead. I knew that I could not
afford to let my emotions get control of me. I had to be mentally and
physically fit for the day ahead. I tried not to watch the harrowing
pictures. But it did not seem to do much good. I had to know each
detail of what had happened…and every detail seemed worse than the
last.
I bathed quickly, changed and had a light breakfast with plenty of
black coffee. It was soon clear that the conference could go ahead. I
said to the police officer in charge that I must get back to Brighton to
open the conference on time.
It was a perfect autumn day and as we drove back into Brighton the
sky was clear and the sea completely calm. I now had my first sight of
the front of the Grand Hotel, a whole vertical section of which had
collapsed.
Then we went on to the Conference Centre itself, where at 9.20 a.m.
the conference opened; and at 9.30 a.m. precisely I and the officers of
the National Union* walked on to the platform. (Many of them had
had to leave clothes in the hotel, but Alistair McAlpine had persuaded
the local Marks & Spencer to open early and by now they were smartly
dressed.) The body of the hall was only about half full, because the
rigorous security checks held up the crowds trying to get in. But the
ovation was colossal. All of us were relieved to be alive, saddened by
the tragedy and determined to show the terrorists that they could not
break our spirit.
By chance, but how appropriately, the first debate was on Northern
Ireland. I stayed to listen to this but then left to work on my speech
which had to be completely revised. Michael Alison (my Parliamentary
Private Secretary) and I retired to an office in the Centre where we
removed most of the partisan sections of the speech: this was not a
time for Labour-bashing but for unity in defence of democracy. Whole
new pages had to be written, though there were tough sections on law
and order which could be used as they stood. Ronnie Millar then
polished the text as he and I went through it. All the while, and in

spite of attempts by my staff to minimize the interruptions, I was
receiving messages and fleeting visits from colleagues and friends. I
knew that John Wakeham had not yet been freed from the rubble and
several people were still missing. A steady stream of flowers arrived
which later were sent on to the hospital where the injured had been
taken.
As in earlier days, I delivered the speech from a text rather than
Autocue and ad libbed a good deal as well. But I knew that far more
important than what I said was the fact that I, as Prime Minister, was
still able to say it. I did not dwell long in the speech on what had
happened. But I tried to sum up the feelings of all of us.
The bomb attack … was an attempt not only to disrupt and terminate our
conference. It was an attempt to cripple Her Majesty’s democratically elected
government. That is the scale of the outrage in which we have all shared.
And the fact that we are gathered here now, shocked but composed and
determined, is a sign not only that this attack has failed, but that all attempts
to destroy democracy by terrorism will fail.

I did not linger after my speech but went immediately to the Royal
Sussex County Hospital to visit the injured. Four people had already
died. Muriel McLean was on a drip feed: she would die later. John
Wakeham was still unconscious and remained so for several days. He
had to be operated on daily for some time to save his legs which had
been terribly crushed. By chance we all knew the consultant in charge,
Tony Trafford, who had been a Conservative MP. I spent hours on the
telephone trying to get the best advice possible from experts in dealing
with crush injuries. In the end it turned out that there was a doctor in
the hospital from El Salvador who had the expertise required. Between
them they managed to save John’s legs. Norman Tebbit regained
consciousness while I was at the hospital and we managed a few
words. His face was bloated as a result of being trapped for so long
under the rubble: I scarcely recognized him. I also talked to Margaret
Tebbit who was in the intensive care unit. She told me she had no
feeling below the neck. As a former nurse, she knew well enough what
that meant.
I left the hospital overcome by such bravery and suffering. I was
driven back to Chequers that afternoon faster than I have ever been
driven before, with a full motorcycle escort. As I spent that night in
what had become my home I could not stop thinking about those
unable to return to theirs.
THE IRISH DILEMMA
What happened in Brighton shocked the world. But the people of
Northern Ireland and the security forces face the ruthless reality of
terrorism day after day. There is no excuse for the IRA’s reign of
terror. If their violence were, as the misleading phrase often has it,
‘mindless’ it would be easier to grasp as the manifestation of a

disordered psyche. But that is not what terrorism is, however many
psychopaths may be attracted to it. Terrorism is the calculated use of
violence…and the threat of it…to achieve political ends. In the case of
the IRA those ends are the coercion of the majority of the people of
Northern Ireland, who have demonstrated their wish to remain within
the United Kingdom, into an all-Ireland state. Along with the political
objective go crimes of other kinds…robbery, protection, fraud to name
but a few.
There are terrorists in both the Catholic and Protestant
communities, and all too many people prepared to give them support
or at least to acquiesce in their activities. Indeed, for a person to stand
out against the terrorists carries great personal risk. The result is that
it is impossible to separate entirely the security policy, required to
prevent terrorist outrages and bring the perpetrators to book, from the
wider political approach to the long-standing ‘Northern Ireland
problem’. For some people that connection implies that you should
make concessions to the terrorist, in particular by weakening the
Union between Ulster and Britain. But it never did so for me. My
policy towards Northern Ireland was always one aimed above all at
upholding democracy and the law: it was always therefore determined
by whatever I considered at a particular time would help bring better
security.
The IRA are the core of the terrorist problem; their counterparts on
the Protestant side would probably disappear if the IRA could be
beaten. But the best chance of beating them is if three conditions are
met. First, the IRA have to be rejected by the nationalist minority on
whom they depend for shelter and support.* This requires that the
minority should be led to support or at least acquiesce in the
constitutional framework of the state in which they live. Second, the
IRA have to be deprived of international support, whether from wellmeaning but naïve Irish Americans, or from Arab revolutionary
regimes like that of Colonel Gaddafi. This requires constant attention
to foreign policy aimed at explaining the facts to the misinformed and
cutting off the weapons from the mischievous. Third, and linked to the
other two, relations between Britain and the Republic of Ireland have
to be carefully managed. Although the IRA have plenty of support in
areas like West Belfast within Northern Ireland, very often it is to the
South that they go to be trained, to receive money and arms and to
escape capture after crimes committed within the United Kingdom.
The border, long and difficult to patrol, is of crucial significance to the
security problem. Much depends on the willingness and ability of the
political leaders of the Republic to co-operate effectively with our
intelligence, security forces and courts. So it was that throughout my
time in office security issues and political initiatives were intertwined.
My own instincts are profoundly Unionist. There is therefore
something of a paradox in that my relations with the Unionist
politicians were so uncomfortable most of the time. Airey Neave and I

felt the greatest sympathy with the Unionists while we were in
Opposition. I knew that these people shared many of my own
attitudes, derived from my staunchly Methodist background. Their
warmth was as genuine as it was usually undemonstrative. Their
patriotism was real and fervent, even if too narrow. They had often
been taken too much for granted. From my visits to Northern Ireland,
often after terrible tragedies, I came to have the greatest admiration in
particular for the way in which the little rural Protestant communities
would come together, looking after one another, after some terrible
loss. But, then, any Conservative should in his bones be a Unionist too.
Our Party has always, throughout its history, been committed to the
defence of the Union: indeed on the eve of the First World War the
Conservatives were not far short of provoking civil disorder to support
it. That is why I could never understand why leading Unionists…
apparently sincerely…suggested that in my dealings with the South
and above all in the Anglo-Irish Agreement, which I shall discuss
shortly, I was contemplating selling them out to the Republic.
But what British politician will ever fully understand Northern
Ireland? I suspect that even the most passionate English supporters of
Ulster do so less than they imagine. Certainly, time and again I found
that apparently innocuous words and phrases had a special
significance in the overheated political world of Ulster…indeed the
mere use of that term to describe the province is an example, allegedly
denoting a ‘Protestant’ bias. In the history of Ireland…both North and
South…which I tried to read up when I could, especially in my early
years of office, reality and myth from the seventeenth century to the
1920s take on an almost Balkan immediacy. Distrust mounting to
hatred and revenge is never far beneath the political surface. And
those who step onto it must do so gingerly.
I started from the need for greater security, which was imperative. If
this meant making limited political concessions to the South, much as
I disliked this kind of bargaining I had to contemplate it. But the
results in terms of security must come through. In Northern Ireland
itself my first choice would have been a system of majority rule…
devolved government on the same lines as Westminster, and subject to
its supremacy…with strong guarantees for the human rights of the
minority, and indeed everyone else. That is broadly the approach
which Airey and I had in mind when the 1979 manifesto was drafted.
But it was not long before it became clear to me that this model was
not going to work, at least for the present. The nationalist minority
were not prepared to believe that majority rule would secure their
rights…whether it took the form of an assembly in Belfast, or more
powerful local government. They insisted on some kind of ‘power
sharing’…that in some way both sides should participate in the
executive function…as well as demanding a role for the Republic in
Northern Ireland, both of which proposals were anathema to the
Unionists.

I had always had a good deal of respect for the old Stormont
system.* When I was Education Secretary I was impressed by the
efficiency of the Northern Ireland education service. The province has
kept its grammar schools and so has consistently achieved some of the
best academic results in the United Kingdom. But majority rule meant
permanent power for the Protestants, and there was no getting away
from the fact that, with some justice, the long years of Unionist rule
were associated with discrimination against the Catholics. I believe the
defects were exaggerated, but Catholic resentment gave rise to the
civil rights movement at the end of the 1960s, which the IRA was able
to exploit. By early 1972 civil disorder existed on such a scale that
Stormont was suspended and replaced by direct rule from London. At
the same time the British Government gave a guarantee that Northern
Ireland would remain a part of the United Kingdom so long as the
majority of its people wished, and this has remained the cornerstone
of policy under governments of both parties.
The political realities of Northern Ireland prevented a return to
majority rule. This was something that many Unionists refused to
accept, but since 1974 they had been joined in the House of Commons
by Enoch Powell, who helped to convert some of them to an altogether
different approach. His aim was that of ‘integration’. Essentially, this
would have meant eliminating any difference between the government
of Northern Ireland and that of the rest of the UK, ruling out a return
to devolution (whether majority rule or power sharing) and any
special role for the Republic. Enoch’s view was that the terrorists
thrived on uncertainty about Ulster’s constitutional position: that
uncertainty would, he argued, be ended by full integration combined
with a tough security policy. I disagreed with this for two reasons.
First, as I have said, I did not believe that security could be
disentangled from other wider political isssues. Second, I never saw
devolved government and an assembly for Northern Ireland as
weakening, but rather strengthening the Union. Like Stormont before
it, it would provide a clear alternative focus to Dublin…without
undermining the sovereignty of the Westminster Parliament.
FIRST ATTEMPTS AT DEVOLUTION
Such were my views about Northern Ireland’s future on entering
office. My conviction that further efforts must be made on both the
political and security fronts had been strengthened by the events of
the second half of 1979.* In the course of that October we discussed in
government the need for an initiative designed to achieve devolution
in Northern Ireland. I was not very optimistic about the prospects but I
agreed to the issue of a discussion document setting out the options. A
conference would be called of the main political parties in Northern
Ireland to see what agreement could be reached.

On Monday 7 January 1980 the conference opened in Belfast. Since
the traumas of the late 1960s and early 1970s the forces of Unionism
in Northern Ireland have been divided, adding factional rivalry to all
the other problems faced by Ulster. On this occasion the largest
Unionist group, the Official Unionist Party (OUP), refused to attend.
Dr Paisley’s more militant Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), the
mainly Catholic nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party
(SDLP) and the moderate middle-class Alliance Party did attend but,
not altogether surprisingly, there was no real common ground.
We adjourned the conference later in March and began to consider
putting forward more specific proposals ourselves in the form of a
white paper. Ministers discussed a draft paper from Northern Ireland
Secretary Humphrey Atkins in June. I had various changes made in the
text in order to take account of Unionist sensitivities. I was no more
optimistic than earlier that the initiative would succeed, but I felt that
it was worth the effort and agreed that the white paper should be
published in early July. It described areas…not including security…in
which powers might be transferred to an executive chosen by an
assembly in the province. It also spelt out two ways of choosing that
executive, one inclining towards majority rule and the other towards
power sharing. Discussions with the Northern Irish parties went on
during the summer and autumn. But by November it was clear that
there would not be sufficient agreement among them to go ahead with
the assembly.
In any case, by now Republican prisoners inside the Maze Prison
had begun the first of their two hunger strikes. I decided that no major
political initiative should be made while the hunger strike was
continuing: we must not appear to be bowing to terrorist demands. I
was also cautious about any high-profile contacts with the Irish
Government at such a time for the same reason.
Charles Haughey had been elected leader of his Fianna Fail Party
and Taoiseach in mid-December 1979. Mr Haughey had throughout
his career been associated with the most Republican strand in
respectable Irish politics. How ‘respectable’ was a subject of some
controversy: in a famous case in 1970 he had been acquitted of
involvement while an Irish minister in the importing of arms for the
IRA. That very fact, however, might inhibit his Republicanism. I found
him easy to get on with, less talkative and more realistic than Garret
FitzGerald, the leader of Fine Gael. Charles Haughey was tough, able
and politically astute with few illusions and, I am sure, not much
affection for the British. He had come to see me in May at No. 10 and
we had had a general and friendly discussion of the scene in Northern
Ireland. He kept on drawing the parallel, which seemed to me an
unconvincing one, between the solution I had found to the Rhodesian
problem and the approach to be pursued in Northern Ireland. Whether
this was Irish blarney or calculated flattery I was not sure. He left me a
gift of a beautiful Georgian silver teapot, which was kind of him. (It

was worth more than the limit allowed for official gifts and I had to
leave it behind at No. 10 when I left office.) By the time that I had my
next talk with Mr Haughey when we were attending the European
Council in Luxemburg on Monday 1 December 1980 it was the hunger
strike which was the Irish main concern.
THE HUNGER STRIKES
To understand the background to the hunger strikes it is necessary to
refer back to the ‘special category’ status for convicted terrorist
prisoners in Northern Ireland which had been introduced, as a
concession to the IRA, in 1972.* This was, and quickly appeared, a bad
mistake. It was ended in 1976. Prisoners convicted of such offences
after that date were treated as ordinary prisoners…with no greater
privileges as regards clothing and association than anyone else. But
the policy was not retrospective. So some ‘special category’ prisoners
continued, being held apart and under a different regime from other
terrorists. Within the so-called ‘H blocks’ of the Maze Prison where the
terrorist prisoners were housed, protests had been more or less
constant, including the revolting ‘dirty protest’, consisting of fouling
cells and smashing up furniture. On 10 October a number of prisoners
announced their intention of beginning a hunger strike on Monday 27
October unless certain demands were met. Of these, the most
significant were that they should be able to wear their own clothes,
associate freely with other ‘political’ prisoners and refrain from prison
work.
There were several discussions among ministers in the interim to see
what concessions might be made to avert the strike. All my instincts
were against bending to such pressure, and certainly there could be no
changes in the prison regime once the strike had begun. There was
never any question of conceding political status. But the RUC Chief
Constable believed that some concessions before the strike would be
helpful in dealing with the threatened public disorder which such a
strike might lead to and though we did not believe that they could
prevent the hunger strike, we were anxious to win the battle for public
opinion. Accordingly, we agreed that all prisoners…not just those who
had committed terrorist crimes…might be permitted to wear ‘civilian
type’ clothing…but not their own clothes…as long as they obeyed the
prison rules. As I had foreseen, these concessions did not in fact
prevent the hunger strike.
To the outside world the issue at stake must have seemed trivial. But
both the IRA and the Government understood that it was not. The IRA
and the prisoners were determined to gain control of the prison and
had a well-thought-out strategy of doing this by whittling away at the
prison regime. The purpose of the privileges they claimed was not to
improve prisoners’ conditions but to take power away from the prison
authorities. They were also keen to establish once again, as they felt

they had in 1972, that their crimes were ‘political’, thus giving the
perpetrators a kind of respectability, even nobility. This we could not
allow. Above all, I would hold fast to the principle that we would not
make concessions of any kind while the hunger strike was continuing.
The IRA were pursuing with calculated ruthlessness a psychological
war alongside their campaign of violence: they had to be resisted at
both levels.
As the hunger strike continued and the prospect approached of one
or more of the prisoners dying we came under a good deal of pressure.
When I met Mr Haughey in the margins of the Luxemburg European
Council on Monday 1 December 1980 he urged me to find some facesaving device which would allow the strikers to end their fast, though
he said that he fully accepted that political status was out of the
question. I replied that the Government could not go on making offers.
There was nothing left to give. Nor was I convinced, then or later, that
the hunger strikers were able to abandon the strike, even if they had
wanted to, against the wishes of the IRA leadership. I had no objection
to restating what we had already said, but there would be no more
concessions under duress.
We met again exactly a week later for our second Anglo-Irish
summit in Dublin. This meeting did more harm than good because,
unusually, I did not involve myself closely enough in the drafting of
the communiqué and, as a result, allowed through the statement that
Mr Haughey and I would devote our next meeting in London ‘to
special consideration of the totality of relationships within these
islands’. Mr Haughey then gave a press briefing which led journalists
to write of a breakthrough on the constitutional question. There had of
course been no such thing. But the damage had been done and it was a
red rag to the Unionist bull.
The Catholic Church was also a factor in dealing with the hunger
strike. I explained the circumstances personally to the Pope on a visit
to Rome on 24 November. He had as little sympathy for terrorists as I
did, as he had made very clear on his visit to the Republic the previous
year. After the Vatican brought pressure on the Irish Catholic
hierarchy, they issued a statement calling on the prisoners to end their
fast, though urging the Government to show ‘flexibility’.
Talk of concessions and compromises continued and intensified as
we approached the point where one or more of the prisoners was
likely to die. It was impossible to predict exactly when this would
happen. But then on Thursday 18 December one of the prisoners
began to lose consciousness and the strike was abruptly called off. The
IRA claimed later that they had done this because we had made
concessions, but this was wholly false. By making the claim they
sought to excuse their defeat, to discredit us, and to prepare the
ground for further protests when the nonexistent concessions failed to
materialize.

I had hoped that this would see the end of the hunger strike tactic,
and indeed of all the prison protests. But it was not to be so. In
January 1981 we tried to bring an end to the ‘dirty protest’, but within
days prisoners who had been moved to clean cells had begun to foul
them. Then we received information in February that there might be
another hunger strike. It was begun on 1 March 1981 by the IRA
leader in the Maze, Bobby Sands, and he was joined at intervals by
others. Simultaneously the ‘dirty protest’ was finally ended, ostensibly
to concentrate attention on the hunger strike.
This was the beginning of a time of troubles. The IRA were on the
advance politically: Sands himself in absentia won the parliamentary
seat of Fermanagh and South Tyrone, at a by-election caused by the
death of an Independent Republican MP. More generally, the SDLP
was losing ground to the Republicans. This was a reflection not just of
the increasing polarization of opinion in both communities, which it
was the IRA’s objective to achieve, but also of the general
ineffectiveness of the SDLP MPs. There was some suggestion, to which
even some of my advisers gave credence, that the IRA were
contemplating ending their terrorist campaign and seeking power
through the ballot box. I never believed this. But it indicated how
successful their propaganda could be.
Michael Foot, then Leader of the Opposition, came to see me, asking
for concessions to the strikers. I was amazed that this thoroughly
decent man could take this line and told him so. I reminded him that
the conditions in the Maze Prison were among the best in any prison
anywhere, well above the general standards prevailing in Britain’s
overcrowded gaols. We had since gone even further in making
improvements than the European Commission on Human Rights had
recommended the previous year. I told Michael Foot that he had
shown himself to be a ‘push-over’. What the terrorist prisoners wanted
was political status, and they were not going to get it.
Bobby Sands died on Tuesday 5 May. The date was of some
significance for me personally, though I did not know it at the time.
From this time forward I became the IRA’s top target for assassination.
Sands’s death provoked rioting and violence, mainly in Londonderry
and Belfast, and the security forces came under increasing strain. It
was possible to admire the courage of Sands and the other hunger
strikers who died, but not to sympathize with their murderous cause.
We had done everything in our power to persuade them to give up
their fast.
So had the Catholic Church. I realized that the Church might be able
to bring pressure to bear on the hunger strikers, which I could not. So
I went as far as I could to involve an organization connected with the
Catholic hierarchy (the Irish Commission for Justice and Peace
(ICJP)), hoping that the strikers would listen to them…though our
reward was to be denounced by the ICJP for going back on

undertakings we had allegedly made in the talks we had had with
them. This false allegation was supported by Garret FitzGerald who
became Taoiseach in place of Mr Haughey at the beginning of July
1981. I wrote to the new Taoiseach to say that he should not be misled
into thinking that the problem of the hunger strike was susceptible to
an easy solution, wanting only a little flexibility on our part. The
protesters were trying to secure a prison regime in which the
prisoners…and not the prison officers…determined what went on.
I also saw the Catholic Primate of All-Ireland, Cardinal O’Fiaich, in
No. 10 on the evening of Thursday 2 July in the forlorn hope that he
might use his influence wisely. Cardinal O’Fiaich was not a bad man;
but he was a romantic Republican, whose nationalism seemed to
prevail over his Christian duty of offering unqualifed resistance to
terrorism and murder. He believed that the hunger strikers were not
acting under IRA orders: I was not convinced. He made light of the
demands of the prisoners for special category status, and it soon
became clear why. He told me that the whole of Northern Ireland was
a lie from start to finish. At the root of what the hunger strikers
believed they were striking for was a united Ireland. He asked when
the time would come that the British Government would admit that its
presence was divisive. The only solution was to bring together all the
Irish people under a government of Irishmen, whether in a federal or a
unitary state. I replied that the course he advocated could not become
the policy of the British Government because it was not acceptable to
the majority of the population of Northern Ireland. The border was a
fact. Those who sought a united Ireland must learn that what could
not be won by persuasion would not be won by violence. We spoke
bluntly, but it was an instructive meeting.
In striving to end the crisis, I had stopped short of force-feeding, a
degrading and itself dangerous practice which I could not support. At
all times hunger strikers were offered three meals a day, had constant
medical attention and, of course, took water. When the hunger strikers
fell into unconsciousness it became possible for their next of kin to
instruct the doctors to feed them through a drip. My hope was that the
families would use this power to bring an end to the strike. Eventually,
after ten prisoners had died, a group of families announced that they
would intervene to prevent the deaths of their relatives and the IRA
called off the strike on Saturday 3 October. With the strike now over, I
authorized some further concessions on clothing, association and loss
of remission. But the outcome was a significant defeat for the IRA.
However, the IRA had regrouped during the strikes, making
headway in the nationalist community. They now turned to violence
on a larger scale, especially on the mainland. The worst incident was
caused by an IRA bomb outside Chelsea Barracks on Monday 10
October. A coach carrying Irish Guardsmen was blown up, killing one
bystander and injuring many soldiers. The bomb was filled with sixinch nails, intended to inflict as much pain and suffering as possible. I

went quickly to the scene and with horrified fascination pulled a nail
out of the side of the coach. To say that the people capable of this
were animals would be wrong: no animal would do such a thing. I
went on to visit the casualties at the three London hospitals to which
they had been taken. I came away more determined than ever that the
terrorists should be isolated, deprived of their support and defeated.
DEALINGS WITH THE IRISH REPUBLIC
After Garret FitzGerald had overcome his initial inclination to play up
to Irish opinion at the British Government’s expense I had quite
friendly dealings with him…all too friendly, to judge by Unionist
reaction to our agreement after a summit in November 1981 to set up
the rather grand sounding ‘Anglo-Irish Inter-Governmental Council’,
which really continued the existing ministerial and official contacts
under a new name. Garret FitzGerald prided himself on being a
cosmopolitan intellectual. He had little time for the myths of Irish
Republicanism and would have liked to secularize the Irish
Constitution and state, not least…but not just…as a way of drawing
the North into a united Ireland. Unfortunately, like many modern
liberals, he overestimated his own powers of persuasion over his
colleagues and countrymen. He was a man of as many words as
Charles Haughey was few. He was also, beneath the skin of
sophistication, even more sensitive to imagined snubs and more
inclined to exaggerate the importance of essentially trivial issues than
Mr Haughey.
How Garret FitzGerald would have reacted to the new proposals we
made in the spring of 1982 for ‘rolling devolution’ of powers to a
Northern Ireland Assembly it is difficult to know. But in fact by now
the whirligig of Irish politics had brought Charles Haughey back as
Taoiseach and Anglo-Irish relations cooled to freezing. The new
Taoiseach denounced our proposals for devolution as an ‘unworkable
mistake’ in which he was also joined by the SDLP. But what angered
me most was the thoroughly unhelpful stance taken by the Irish
Government during the Falklands War, which I have mentioned
earlier.*
Jim Prior, who succeeded Humphrey Atkins as Secretary of State for
Northern Ireland shortly before the end of the second hunger strike,
was a good deal more enthusiastic and optimistic about the proposals
in our white paper than I was. Ian Gow, my PPS, was against the
whole idea and I shared a number of his reservations. Before
publication, I had the text of the white paper substantially changed in
order to cut out a chapter dealing with relations with the Irish
Republic and, I hoped, minimize Unionist objections: although Ian
Paisley’s DUP went along with the proposals, many integrationists in
the Official Unionist Party were critical. Twenty Conservative MPs
voted against the bill when it came forward in May and three junior

members of the Government resigned.
If the aim of the white paper initiative was to strengthen the
moderates in the nationalist community it certainly did not have this
effect. In the elections that October to the Northern Ireland Assembly
Sinn Fein won 10 per cent of the total, over half of the vote won by
the SDLP. For this, of course, the SDLP’s own tactics and negative
attitudes were heavily to blame: but they continued them by refusing
to take their seats in the assembly when it opened the following
month. The campaign itself had been marked by a sharp increase in
sectarian murders.
The IRA were still at work on the mainland too. I was chairing a
meeting of ‘E’ Committee in the Cabinet Room on the morning of
Tuesday 20 July 1982 when I heard (and felt) the unmistakeable
sound of a bomb exploding in the middle distance. I immediately
asked that enquiries be made, but continued the meeting. As the
morning wore on I noticed, looking out of the window, that the
soldiers had not arrived on Horse Guards for their parade. When the
news finally came through it was even worse than I feared. Two
bombs had exploded, one two hours after the other, in Hyde Park and
Regent’s Park, the intended victims being in the first case the
Household Cavalry and in the second the band of the Royal Green
Jackets. Eight people were killed and 53 injured. The carnage was
truly terrible. I heard about it first hand from some of the victims
when I went to the hospital the next day.
The return of Garret FitzGerald as Taoiseach in December 1982
provided us with an opportunity to improve the climate of Anglo-Irish
relations with a view to pressing the South for more action on security.
But I was wary about allowing the Irish to set the pace: Dr FitzGerald’s understanding of Unionist sensibilities was no greater than Mr
Haughey’s and I had plenty of experience already of the exaggerated
construction which both nationalists and Unionists placed on even
bland pledges of Anglo-Irish co-operation.
I had a meeting with Dr FitzGerald at the European Council at
Stuttgart in June 1983. I shared the worry he expressed about the
erosion of SDLP support by Sinn Fein. However uninspiring SDLP
politicians might be…at least since the departure of the courageous
Gerry Fitt…they were the minority’s main representatives and an
alternative to the IRA. They had to be wooed. But Dr FitzGerald had
no suggestions to make about how to get the SDLP to take part in the
Northern Ireland Assembly, which was pointless without their
participation. He pressed me to agree talks between officials on future
co-operation.
I did not think there was much to talk about, but I accepted the
proposal. Robert Armstrong, head of the civil service and Cabinet
Secretary, and his opposite number in the Republic, Dermot Nally,
became the main channels of communication. Over the summer and
autumn of 1983 we received a number of informal approaches from

the Irish, by no means consistent or clear in content. It became
apparent that Dr FitzGerald’s Government did not speak with a single
voice. At various times and with various degrees of specificity they
seemed to be offering to amend Articles 2 and 3 of the Irish
Constitution, by which the Republic claims sovereignty over Northern
Ireland. We became increasingly sceptical of their ability to deliver
this, since it would involve a referendum and divide the Irish
Government. We also had well-justified doubts about talk of a more
helpful line from the SDLP. On the security side the Irish were offering
better cooperation, but proposing also a direct role for the Irish police
(the Garda), and possibly the Irish Army, in Northern Ireland itself, as
well as a Southern involvement in the Northern courts. They urged
another attempt at devolution and, surprisingly, appeared ready to
contemplate a return to majority rule.
Most of these ideas were impossible, implying some kind of joint
sovereignty over Northern Ireland. Moreover, I disliked intensely this
kind of bargaining about security. It seemed to me that to withhold
full co-operation to catch criminals and save lives because one wanted
some political gain was fundamentally wrong. But the Irish side did
not see it like that.
I allowed the talks between the two sides to continue. I also had in
mind the political danger of seeming to adopt a negative reaction to
new proposals. This in turn meant that I had, within limits, to treat
seriously the Republic’s so-called ‘New Ireland Forum’. This had
originally been set up mainly as a way of helping the SDLP at the 1983
general election but Garret FitzGerald was now using it as a sounding
board for ‘ideas’ about the future of Northern Ireland. Since the
Unionist parties would take no part in it the outcome was bound to be
skewed towards a united Ireland. For my part I was anxious that this
collection of nationalists, North and South, might attract international
respectability for moves to weaken the Union, so I was intensely wary
of them.
BACKGROUND TO THE ANGLO-IRISH
AGREEMENT, 1983–1985
I saw Garret FitzGerald at Chequers on the morning of Monday 7
November 1983 for our second bilateral summit. It was a modestly
useful discussion, but the Irish always had difficulty understanding
that joint sovereignty was a nonstarter. Immediately after the Irish
team left I held a further meeting with ministers and officials. I felt
that we must now come up with our own proposals and I asked Robert
Armstrong to draw up an initial paper setting out the options. I laid
special stress on the need for secrecy; a leak would destroy the
prospects for a new initiative. This meeting, from our side, was the
origin of the later Anglo-Irish Agreement.

The need for Irish help on security was again evident after the
appalling murder by the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) of
worshippers at the Pentecostal Gospel Hall at Darkley in County
Armagh on Sunday 20 November. In spite of all the fine words about
the need to defeat terrorism which I had been hearing from the
Taoiseach, the Irish Justice minister refused to meet Jim Prior to
review security co-operation and the Garda Commissioner similarly
refused to meet the Chief Constable of the RUC.
Then the IRA struck again on the mainland. After lunch on Saturday
17 December I left Chequers to attend a carol concert in the Royal
Festival Hall. While I was there I received news that a car bomb had
exploded just outside Harrods. I left at the first opportunity and went
to the scene. By the time I arrived most of the dead and injured had
been removed but I shall never forget the sight of the charred body of
a teenage girl lying where she had been blown against the store
window. Even by the IRA’s own standards this was a particularly
callous attack. Five people including two police officers died. The fact
that one of the dead was an American should have brought home to
US sympathizers with the IRA the real nature of Irish terrorism.
The Harrods bomb was designed to intimidate not just the
Government but the British people as a whole. The IRA had chosen the
country’s most prestigious store at a time when the streets of London
were full of shoppers in festive mood looking forward to Christmas.
There was an instinctive feeling…in reaction to the outrage…that
everyone must go about their business normally. Denis was among
those who went to shop in Harrods the following Monday to do just
that.
Two days after the bomb we received word that the Irish Cabinet
was to meet the following day to consider proscribing Sinn Fein south
of the border. I summoned a meeting of ministers straight away to
consider our response. Clearly if the Irish proscribed, we would take
similar action. But our tentative conclusion was that proscription
would not directly affect the fight against Irish terrorism in Great
Britain, and would probably lead to disorder and violence in Northern
Ireland. In the event the Irish Cabinet decided not to go ahead.
On Christmas Eve I visited the province myself, meeting members of
the security forces and the general public. I was all but mobbed by
cheering well-wishers in the main street of Bangor, a seaside town in
County Down, and added to my rapidly growing collection of Tyrone
crystal, purchased on Ulster visits, while Denis acquired another tie.
By the end of the year the prospects for some kind of negotiation
seemed reasonable, but the acid test for me would be the question of
security. Not that the picture on security was wholly bad. The Irish
Government devoted significant resources to security…more on a per
capita basis than the United Kingdom. Also co-operation between
Dublin and London was good. The real area of difficulty lay in cross-

border co-operation between the Garda and the RUC. In spite of our
efforts to help, Garda training and use of information were
unsatisfactory. These shortcomings were worsened by personal
mistrust between Garda and RUC personnel. We wanted to find
solutions to these problems, some of which required the Irish to
deploy more resources to the border, others of which were really a
matter of political will. The best hope on both accounts seemed to lie
with an Anglo-Irish Agreement which would acknowledge in a public
way the Republic’s interest in the affairs of the North, while keeping
decision-making out of its hands and firmly in ours. This was what I
now set out to achieve.
In January and February 1984 I held meetings to run through the
options. The Irish were keen to pursue possibilities of joint policing
and even mixed courts (with British and Irish judges sitting on the
same bench), about both of which I had the gravest reservations…
reservations which grew stronger still as time went on. The idea,
favoured by Dr FitzGerald, of the Garda policing nationalist areas like
West Belfast seemed quite impractical: not only would the Unionists
have been outraged, the Garda officers would probably have been shot
on sight by the IRA. As for joint Anglo-Irish courts, this would have
cast doubt on the whole administration of justice which had taken
place in the province. Majority decisions in terrorist cases by a mixed
court would have been disastrous. The same arguments, with slightly
less though sufficient force, applied to the proposal for three-judge
courts in Ulster, which was another option favoured by the Irish.
We decided to put forward our own proposals at the beginning of
March. Robert Armstrong travelled to Dublin and presented our ideas
orally…no papers were exchanged until much later in the talks. Our
main idea was to establish a Joint Security Commission, to work up
proposals that might include a measure of joint policing along a zone
on both sides of the border…the element of reciprocity was crucial to
us. We were prepared also to consider other measures with respect to
the criminal law and local government in Northern Ireland.
The Irish responded immediately by ruling out the idea of a security
zone, though encouraging further talks. They made a counterapproach in May, still based on the idea of ‘joint sovereignty’, though
they sought to get around our fundamental objections by using the
term ‘joint authority’. I was not at any point prepared to concede this,
but at the end of May I authorized Robert Armstrong to develop the
idea of a consultative role for the Republic in Northern Ireland. I also
requested a study of a quite different approach to the problem:
redrawing the existing border with the Republic, which followed the
old Irish county lines. My instinct was that there might be political
and security gains from getting rid of the anomalies, in the event that
our talks with the Irish came to nothing.
There was an important development over the summer: the Irish for
the first time explicitly put forward the idea of amending Articles 2

and 3 of their Constitution to make Irish unity an aspiration rather
than a legal claim. This was attractive to me, in that I thought it
should reassure the Unionists. But it was clear that the Irish would
expect a good deal in return, and I still doubted their capacity to
deliver the referendum vote. So the net effect of their proposal was
actually to make me more pessimistic and suspicious. Also they were
trying to go too far too fast. The Irish still hankered after joint
authority (indeed this lay behind the subsequent contrary
interpretations we and they placed on the provisions of the Anglo-Irish
Agreement). I made these points forcefully to Dr FitzGerald when he
came to see me at No. 10 on Monday 3 September.
Jim Prior resigned as Northern Ireland Secretary in September 1984
to become chairman of GEC. I brought Douglas Hurd, a former Foreign
Office mandarin and a talented political novelist, who had been Ted
Heath’s political secretary at No. 10 but who had shown a willingness
to work in the new ideological climate, into the Cabinet as his
replacement. Shortly afterwards I widened the circle of those involved
on our side of the talks to include senior officials in the Northern
Ireland Office (NIO). We held a meeting of ministers and officials in
early October which brought out the likely extent of Unionist
objections, and in particular the fact that amendment of Articles 2 and
3 might cut little ice with them; indeed, I was told that ‘an aspiration
to unity’ was scarcely less offensive to the Unionists than an outright
claim.
It was at this point that the IRA bombed the Grand Hotel in
Brighton. I was not going to appear to be bombed to the negotiating
table; the incident confirmed my feeling that we should go slowly, and
I feared too that it might be the first of a series which might poison
the atmosphere so much that an agreement would prove impossible.
In what remained of October and in early November we toughened
our negotiating position. On a visit to Dublin Douglas Hurd and Robert
Andrew (the Permanent Secretary of the NIO) made it clear to the
Irish that we did not believe that an ambitious package involving
amendment of Articles 2 and 3 was possible. It seemed to me that a
breakdown might not be far off.
On Wednesday 14 November 1984 I held a meeting of ministers and
officials to review the position. I was to meet Garret FitzGerald at our
regular Anglo-Irish summit the following week and I was alarmed by
the lack of realism which still seemed evident in the Irish proposals. I
decided that while I would go to the summit willing to make progress
on co-operation I would disabuse him in no uncertain terms of the
possibility of joint authority.
When Dr FitzGerald and I met at Chequers on Sunday 18 and
Monday 19 November I tried to do just this. I was prepared to offer a
Joint Security Commission (though operational security matters in
Northern Ireland would remain in our hands) but Dr FitzGerald was
still talking of the minority needing to be ‘policed by people from their

own community’. He was still arguing for power sharing in the
Northern Ireland Assembly as a precondition for the SDLP taking part
in it, which was almost equally unrealistic given Unionist attitudes. As
foreseen, we disagreed sharply over the Irish desire for joint authority.
But I agreed that talks at an official level should continue.
At my press conference afterwards I was asked about the
conclusions of the New Ireland Forum which had issued a report
earlier in the year setting out three ‘options’ for the future government
of Ireland: unification, confederation and joint authority. I listed them
and said that each of them was ‘out’. There seemed no point in
pretending that these were acceptable approaches when they were not.
Almost immediately a wave of Irish indignation broke against the
defences of Downing Street. Dr FitzGerald attacked me in a ‘private’
address to his own Parliamentary Party, and was reported to have
described my remarks as ‘gratuitously offensive’. The Irish Minister of
Justice warned our Ambassador that the current crisis in relations was
such that the Irish public’s tolerance of the IRA would grow and that
the Irish Government’s ability to deal with terrorism had been
weakened.
I was therefore somewhat surprised to hear that the Taoiseach
wanted a private meeting with me when I was at Dublin Castle for the
European Council in early December. I agreed and we had a short
discussion in which he pleaded that extra sensitivity was needed in
what was said after eight hundred years of misunderstandings. I felt at
the end that I had gained an insight into every one of those eight
hundred years.
Nevertheless, discussions with the Irish continued through the first
half of 1985. In January they agreed to begin detailed consideration of
an agreement on the basis of a British draft, based on the idea of
consultation rather than joint authority. But more and more leaks
appeared about proposals on joint courts and joint policing from the
Irish side. This worsened Unionist distrust still further.
In our discussions with the Irish of a joint Anglo-Irish body as a
framework for consultation there was a succession of
misunderstandings and disagreements. Although the idea of amending
Articles 2 and 3 was clearly now off the agenda, we pressed the Irish
for some kind of firm declaration committing them to the principle
that unification could only come about with the consent of the
majority in Northern Ireland. We hoped that such a declaration would
reassure the Unionists, to the extent that such a thing was possible.
The Irish wanted the proposed joint body to have a much bigger say
over economic and social matters in the North than we were prepared
to concede. Nor did the gains we could hope for on security become
any clearer. I found myself constantly toning down the commitments
which were put before me in our own draft proposals, let alone being
prepared to accept those emanating from Dublin. If the arrangements
worked badly we must leave ourselves a retreat. In early June I

insisted that there should be a review mechanism built into the AngloIrish Agreement. I also continued to resist Irish pressure for joint
courts and SDLP demands for radical changes in the Ulster Defence
Regiment (UDR) and the RUC.
When I met Dr FitzGerald at the Milan European Council on the
morning of Saturday 29 June 1985 he said that he was prepared to
have the Irish Government state publicly that there could be no
change in the status of Northern Ireland without the consent of the
majority of the people and acknowledge the fact that this consent did
not exist. He was prepared to have a special Irish task force sent to the
south side of the border to strengthen security. He was also prepared
to have Ireland ratify the European Convention on the Suppression of
Terrorism (ECST). But he was still pressing for joint courts, changes in
the RUC and the UDR…to be announced as ‘confidence-building
measures’, rather than as part of the agreement itself… and now added
the proposal for a major review of sentences for terrorist prisoners if
the violence was brought to an end. It remained to be seen whether he
could deliver on his promises. But in any case the demands were still
unrealistic, as I told him. I could go no further than considering the
possibility of joint courts: I was certainly not going to give an
assurance in advance that they would be established. I considered a
review of sentences quite out of the question and he did not press the
point. I warned him that announcing measures on policing at the same
time as the Anglo-Irish Agreement would cause a sharp Unionist
reaction and jeopardize the whole position.
At this point Dr FitzGerald became very agitated. He declared that
unless the minority in Northern Ireland could be turned against the
IRA, Sinn Fein would gain the upper hand in the North and provoke a
civil war which would drag the Republic down as well, with Colonel
Gaddafi providing millions to help this happen. A sensible point was
being exaggerated to the level of absurdity. I said that of course I
shared his aim of preventing Ireland falling under hostile and
tyrannical forces. But that was not an argument for taking measures
which would simply provoke the Unionists and cause unnecessary
trouble.
By the time our meeting ended, however, I felt that we were some
way towards an agreement, though there were still points to resolve. I
also knew that a lot of progress had been made in the official talks, so
I had good reason to believe that a successful conclusion was possible.
Dr FitzGerald and I even discussed the timing and place of the signing
ceremony.
THE ANGLO-IRISH AGREEMENTAND REACTIONS: 1985–1987
At two o’clock on the afternoon of Friday 15 November Garret
FitzGerald and I signed the Anglo-Irish Agreement at Hillsborough

Castle in Northern Ireland. It was not perfect from either side’s point
of view. Article 1 of the agreement affirmed that any change in the
status of Northern Ireland would only come about with the consent of
a majority of the people of Northern Ireland and recognized that the
present wish of that majority was for no change in the status of the
province. I believed that this major concession by the Irish would
reassure the Unionists that the Union itself was not in doubt. I thought
that given my own well-known attitude towards Irish terrorism they
would have confidence in my intentions. I was wrong about that. But
the Unionists miscalculated too. The tactics which they used to oppose
the agreement…a general strike, intimidation, flirting with civil
disobedience…worsened the security situation and weakened their
standing in the eyes of the rest of the United Kingdom.
The agreement allowed the Irish Government to put forward views
and proposals on matters relating to Northern Ireland in a wide range
of areas, including security. But it was made clear that there was no
derogation from the sovereignty of the United Kingdom. It was for us,
not the Irish, to make the decisions. There was no commitment to do
anything more than consider the possibility of mixed courts. If there
was devolution in Northern Ireland, which the agreement committed
us to work for, those areas of policy devolved would be taken out of
the hands of the Anglo-Irish Inter-Governmental Conference. (Garret
FitzGerald, showing some courage, publicly accepted this implication
of the agreement at the press conference which followed the signing.)
The agreement itself would be subject to review at the end of three
years or earlier if either Government requested. The Taoiseach also
said that it was the intention of his Government to accede as soon as
possible to the ECST.
The real question now was whether the agreement would result in
better security. The strong opposition of the Unionists would be a
major obstacle. By contrast, international…most importantly
American…reaction was very favourable. Above all, however, we
hoped for a more co-operative attitude from the Irish Government,
security forces and courts. If we got this the agreement would be
successful. We would have to wait and see.
One person who was not going to wait was Ian Gow. I spent some
time trying to persuade him not to go but he insisted on resigning as a
Treasury minister. This was a personal blow to me, though I am glad
to say that the friendship between the two of us and our families was
barely affected. Ian was one of the very few who resigned from my
Government on a point of principle. I respected him as much as I
disagreed with him.
By the end of the year, however, I had become very worried about
the Unionist reaction. It was worse than anyone had predicted to me.
Of the legitimate political leaders, Ian Paisley was in the forefront of
the mass campaign against the agreement. But far more worrying was
the fact that behind him and other leaders stood harder and more

sinister figures who might all too easily cross the line from civil
disobedience to violence. As I told Dr FitzGerald when I saw him on
the morning of Tuesday 3 December in Luxemburg, it was now vital to
show immediate practical results from the agreement, particularly as
regards security co-operation, Irish accession to the ECST and a cooperative attitude by the SDLP to devolution. But now, as later, it
seemed to me that he could not grasp how important it was to achieve
the support or at least the acquiescence of the Unionist majority.
Shortly before the agreement, Tom King had taken over as Secretary
of State for Northern Ireland. Tom was initially highly sceptical about
the value of the agreement…indeed within weeks of taking office he
had sent me a minute arguing that the balance of the agreement as
drafted was heavily in favour of the Irish…though he later became
more enthusiastic. Both of us agreed that the political priority was to
win over the support of at least some Unionist leaders and that wider
Unionist opinion which I felt was probably more understanding of
what we were trying to achieve. I was convinced that the people who
met me on my visits to Northern Ireland could harbour no doubts
about my commitment to their safety and freedom. Indeed, this was
confirmed for me when I invited nonpolitical representatives of the
majority community from business and the professions to lunch at No.
10 on Wednesday 5 February 1986. Their view was that for many
people the real concerns in Northern Ireland were with jobs, housing,
education…in short the sort of issues which are at the centre of
politics on the mainland. I was also confirmed in my impression that
one of the problems of Northern Irish politics was that it no longer
attracted enough people of high calibre.
I invited Jim Molyneaux and Ian Paisley to Downing Street on the
morning of Tuesday 25 February. I told them that I believed that they
underestimated the advantages which the agreement offered, both in
the reaffirmation of Northern Ireland’s status within the United
Kingdom and in terms of cross-border security co-operation. I
recognized that they were bitter at not having been consulted during
the negotiation of the agreement. I offered to devise a system which
would allow full consultation with them in future and which would
not just be confined to matters discussed in the Anglo-Irish InterGovernmental Conference. Security, for example, could be included. I
also said that we were prepared in principle to sit down at a roundtable conference with the parties in Northern Ireland to consider,
without any preconditions, the scope for devolution. Third, we were
ready for consultations with the Unionist parties on the future of the
existing Northern Ireland Assembly and on the handling of Northern
Ireland business at Westminster. I made it plain that I would not agree
to even temporary suspension of the Anglo-Irish Agreement, but the
agreement would be operated ‘sensitively’. At the time this seemed to
go down well. I went on to warn of the damage which would be done
if the proposed general strike in Northern Ireland on 3 March took

place. Ian Paisley said that he and Jim Molyneaux knew nothing of the
plans. They would reach their decisions when they had considered the
outcome of the present meeting. It was a reasonably successful
meeting. But the following day after they had consulted their
supporters in Northern Ireland they came out in support of the strike.
Nor did I find the SDLP any more co-operative. I saw John Hume in
my room in the House of Commons on the afternoon of Thursday 27
February. I urged that the SDLP should give more open support to the
security forces, but to no avail. He seemed more interested to score
points at the expense of the Unionists. A few days later I wrote to
Garret FitzGerald urging him to get the SDLP to adopt a more sensible
and statesman-like approach.

But by now Dr FitzGerald and his colleagues in Dublin were adding
their own fuel to the flames, publicly exaggerating the powers which
the Irish had obtained through the agreement, a tactic which was of
course entirely self-defeating. Nor, in spite of detailed criticisms and
suggestions, could we get the Irish to make the required improvements
in their own security. The Irish judicial authorities were proving no
more co-operative either, having sent back warrants for the arrest and
extradition of Evelyn Glenholmes from the Irish Republic on suspicion
of involvement in terrorism because, among other things, they claimed
that a full stop was missing.
In any case, Garret FitzGerald’s Government’s own position was
weakening. In spite of our representations, he was back-tracking on his
commitment to get the European Convention on the Suppression of
Terrorism though the Dâil. His Government was now in a minority and
he told us that he was under pressure to accept the requirement that
we should make a prima facie case before extradition to the United
Kingdom was granted. This would actually have worsened the
situation on extradition, reviving past difficulties which recent Irish
judge-made law had overcome. Dr FitzGerald told us that he was
resisting the pressure, but it soon became clear that he was seeking a
quid pro quo. He wanted us to introduce three-judge courts for terrorist
trials in Northern Ireland. Following a meeting with the Taoiseach in
Dublin, Tom King brought forward a paper supporting the idea, which
Geoffrey Howe and Douglas Hurd also backed. But the lawyers were
outraged and my sympathies lay with them. I did not believe that
there was a case for three-judge courts, nor did I see why we should
make concessions to get the Irish Government to carry out its
commitments. The proposal was turned down at a ministerial meeting
at the beginning of October 1986.
In the end Dr FitzGerald managed to pass his legislation, but with
the proviso that it would not come into effect unless the Dáil passed a
further resolution a year later, which stored up trouble for the future.
Shortly afterwards, in January 1987, his Coalition Government
collapsed and the subsequent election brought Charles Haughey back
to the office of Taoiseach. This heralded more difficulties. Mr Haughey

and his Party had opposed the agreement, though his formal position
was now that he would be prepared to make it work. I knew, though,
that he felt much less commitment to it and I suspected that he would
be prepared to play up to Republican opinion in the South more than
had his predecessor.
The security position in the province had also worsened. I received a
report from George Younger on the strength of the IRA north and
south of the border which convinced me that a new drive against them
was necessary. There was a rising trend of violence, particularly
against personnel in the security forces, and cross-border co-operation
was still not effective. The scale of the supplies of arms being received
by the IRA, on which we already had a good deal of intelligence, was
confirmed by the interception of the Eksund… with its hoard of Libyan
arms…by French customs in October.
IRA ATTACKS AND EXTRA SECURITY
MEASURES, 1987–1990
I was at the reception which follows the Remembrance Day Service at
the Cenotaph when I received news that a bomb had exploded at
Enniskillen in County Fermanagh. It had been planted yards away
from the town War Memorial in an old school building, part of which
collapsed on the crowd which had assembled for the service. Eleven
people were killed, and more than sixty injured. No warning was
given.
The next day (Monday 9 November) I met a delegation of Jim
Molyneaux, Ken Maginnis, the local MP, and people from Enniskillen.
They wanted me to go much further in tightening security, by ending
the present 50 per cent remission available to sentenced terrorist
prisoners,* by proscribing Sinn Fein, by tightening control of the
border, by ending the so-called ‘right to silence’ (the provision
whereby the refusal to answer questions cannot be adduced as
evidence of guilt in court) and by bringing back internment.** I too
believed that there must be a new review of security: indeed, I had
already initiated one. I would see which if any of these was
practicable.
At least I felt that I could make one personal gesture which would
be appreciated. On Sunday 22 November I flew to Northern Ireland to
attend a Remembrance Service at St Martin’s Cathedral, Enniskillen. It
was a cold, wet day. After the service I talked briefly to the bereaved,
including Mr Gordon Wilson whose daughter Marie had died beside
him in the explosion and who had publicly forgiven the murderers in
terms which inspired…perhaps shamed…those who heard him.
From now on the requirements for practical improvements in
security, reviewed after each new tragedy, increasingly dominated my
policy towards both Northern Ireland and the Republic. It slowly

became clear that the wider gains for which I had hoped from greater
support by the nationalist minority in Northern Ireland or the Irish
Government and people for the fight against terrorism were not going
to be forthcoming. Only the international dimension became
noticeably easier to deal with as a result of the agreement. My
reluctant conclusion was that terrorism would have to be met with
more and more effective counter-terrorist activity; and that in fighting
terror we would have to stand almost alone, while the Irish indulged
in gesture politics.
Nonetheless, I kept up the pressure on the Irish for effective
extradition arrangements of terrorists suspected of offences committed
within the United Kingdom. Predictably, the Haughey Government
was unwilling to confirm the Extradition Act that Dr FitzGerald had
passed at the end of his administration without trying to exact a price.
We heard the familiar plea for three-judge courts, followed by a new
demand for our Attorney-General to provide his Irish counterpart with
a note confirming his intention to prosecute founded on a sufficiency
of evidence…a note that could be scrutinized by the Irish courts. This
was an impossible scheme and we rejected it. The upshot was new
Irish legislation that for a time brought extradition to a halt altogether.
In the meantime our own review of security had come to a number
of conclusions, principally the redeployment of the army to strengthen
anti-terrorist operations and to patrol in areas close to the border. As a
matter of courtesy I wrote to Mr Haughey in January 1988 informing
him of what we were doing. But it soon appeared that a more farreaching review of security was required…and that we could rely only
on a thoroughly unhelpful attitude from the Irish in the course of it.
On Sunday 6 March three Irish terrorists were shot dead by our
security forces in Gibraltar. There was not the slightest doubt about
the terrorists’ identity or intentions. Contrary to later reports, the
Spanish authorities had been extremely co-operative. The funeral of
the terrorists was held in Milltown Cemetery, Belfast. From the
thousands attending you would imagine that these people were
martyrs not would-be murderers. The spiral of violence now
accelerated. A gunman attacked the mourners, three of whom were
killed and 68 injured. It was at the funeral of two of these mourners
that what was to remain in my mind as the single most horrifying
event in Northern Ireland during my term of office occurred.
No one who saw the film of the lynching of the two young soldiers
trapped by that frenzied Republican mob, pulled from their car,
stripped and murdered, will believe that reason or goodwill can ever
be a substitute for force when dealing with Irish Republican terrorism.
I went to be with the relatives of our murdered soldiers when the
bodies were brought back to Northolt; I shall not forget the remark of
Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader, that I would have many more
bodies to meet in that way. I could hardly believe it when the BBC
initially refused to supply to the RUC film which might have been

useful in bringing to justice the perpetrators of this crime, though they
later complied. But I knew that the most important task was for us to
use every means available to beat the IRA. On the same day as the
news came in of what had happened I told Tom King that there must
be a paper brought forward setting out all the options. I was
determined that nothing should be ruled out.
On the afternoon of Tuesday 22 March I held an initial meeting. The
policing of funerals was already under review. I said that the security
forces must take all necessary steps, including extensive searches in
nationalist areas, to apprehend those responsible for the murder of the
British Army corporals. Measures to improve the chances of securing
convictions in Northern Ireland courts…such as the use of DNA fingerprinting, and the ending of the ‘right to silence’ and measures to seize
the finances of groups which practised or supported violence…should
be investigated. Cross-border security cooperation must be
strengthened and security on the border itself must be improved. We
must examine whether the instructions about the circumstances in
which the security forces could use their weapons (the ‘yellow card’)
should be reviewed in case they were too restrictive. In addition, I said
that more far-reaching measures must now be considered. Perhaps
Sinn Fein should be banned. We should consider the introduction of
selective internment, which would be much more effective if it were
introduced simultaneously in the Republic. I wondered whether the
introduction of identity cards in Northern Ireland might enable us to
control more easily the movements of suspects. Should the numbers of
soldiers in Northern Ireland be increased? Should the present doctrine
of so-called ‘police primacy’ be reversed to give the army control in
security matters? Could we do more to deprive the terrorists of the
‘oxygen of publicity’ (a phrase I borrowed with permission but without
attribution from the Chief Rabbi)? In fact, many of these possibilities
would have to be jettisoned on one ground or another. But I felt that I
owed it to those two soldiers and their families to ensure that nothing
which could save other young lives was overlooked.
This far-reaching security review continued during the spring. Mr
Haughey added to the problem of restoring confidence and stability in
Northern Ireland by an astonishing speech which he made in the
United States in April. This listed all of his objections to British policy,
lumping together the Attorney-General’s decision not to initiate
prosecutions following the Stalker-Sampson Report into the RUC,* the
Court of Appeal’s rejection of the appeal of the so-called ‘Birmingham
Six’**(as if it was for the British Government to tell British courts how
to administer justice), the killing of the terrorists in Gibraltar and
other matters. There was no mention in his speech of IRA violence, no
acknowledgement of the need for cross-border co-operation and no
commitment to the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It was a shabby case of
playing to the American Irish gallery.

I wrote to Mr Haughey on Wednesday 27 April to protest in the
most vigorous terms. I took him to task not only for what he had said
but for what he had failed to deliver on cross-border security cooperation. In spite of an ill-judged speech by Geoffrey Howe in which
he said that he did not ‘underestimate the hurt felt by the Irish in
recent months’, I let it be known that there was no possibility of
ordinary relations with Dublin resuming until I received a reply to my
letter…a reply which was not forthcoming until Wednesday 15 June.
The reply, when it came, was short and noncommittal. But I felt that
my sharp letter had done some good when I received a long message
from Mr Haughey prior to my meeting with him at the end of the
European Council in Hanover on Tuesday 28 June. In this he
reaffirmed in the strongest terms his opposition to terrorism, repeated
his commitment to the Anglo-Irish Agreement and conveyed his
personal support for security co-operation. But the statement also
showed what we were up against; for he made clear that his whole
approach was based on the objective of a united Ireland and that he
saw the Anglo-Irish Agreement as a staging post to that. That was
utterly unacceptable to us.
At the next European Council in Hanover I took up the question of
security co-operation, which was of far more importance to me than
any personal differences. I said that though Mr Haughey had affirmed
that he had difficulties with Irish public opinion about this, I had
difficulty myself about bombs, guns, explosions, people being beaten
to death and naked hatred. I had had to see ever more young men in
the security forces killed. We knew that the terrorists went over the
border to the Republic to plan their operations and to store their
weapons. We got no satisfactory intelligence of their movements. Once
they crossed the border they were lost. Indeed, we received far better
intelligence co-operation from virtually all other European countries
than with the Republic. If it was a question of resources, then we were
ready to offer equipment and training. Or if this were politically
difficult, there were other countries who could offer such help. There
was no room for amateurism.
Mr Haughey defended the Irish Government’s and security forces’
record. But I was not convinced. I said that I wondered whether Mr
Haughey realized that the biggest concentration of terrorists anywhere
in the world save Lebanon was to be found in Ireland. The border was
virtually open so far as terrorists were concerned. I accepted that the
Republic’s resources were limited, but I was not satisfied that they
were using them to best effect. I said that the results of the Anglo-Irish
Agreement so far had been disappointing. Nor was I any less
disappointed by the attitude of the SDLP. As for the suggestion that all
would be peace and light if there were a united Ireland, as Mr
Haughey’s recent message had suggested, the reality was that there
would be the worst civil war ever. In any case, most nationalists in the
North would prefer to continue to live there because they were much

better provided for than in the Republic. Indeed, there continued to be
a substantial flow of Irish immigrants to the UK, who were a
significant burden on the welfare system.
Surprisingly, perhaps, though we were both pretty outspoken,
neither of us, I believe, left our meeting with any ill will or rancour.
Mr Haughey knew where I stood. He had, as it turned out, taken
seriously at least some of what I had said about the shortcomings of
Irish security co-operation. I, for my part, felt that I understood him
better than I had before…and better perhaps than I ever did Garret
FitzGerald.
There was a surge in IRA violence from early August. It began with
an IRA bomb at an Army Communications Centre in Mill Hill in North
London. One soldier was killed. This was the first mainland bomb
since 1984. I was at Alice Springs on a visit to Australia when I learnt
the news. Irish Republican sympathizers…on the streets and in the
media…did their best to disrupt my tour. There were some
particularly awkward moments in Melbourne where crowds of both
opponents and well-wishers were funnelled into an overcrowded
shopping precinct by Australian police, inexperienced in dealing with
such situations. But I took every opportunity to express my contempt
for the IRA. In a television interview I said that ‘they should be wiped
off the civilized world.’
The bombing campaign continued. I was on holiday in Cornwall
when I was woken very early on Saturday 20 August to be told of an
attack at Ballygawley in County Tyrone on a bus carrying British
soldiers travelling from Belfast back from a fortnight’s leave. Seven
were dead and twenty-eight injured. I immediately decided to return
to London and helicoptered into the Wellington Barracks at 9.20 a.m.
Archie Hamilton (my former PPS, who was now Armed Forces
minister) came straight in to No. 10 to brief me. He told me that the
bus had not been on its designated route at the time of the explosion
but on a parallel road some three miles away. A very large bomb,
wire-controlled, had been laid in wait for the bus and then detonated.
I questioned whether this could be a safe way of moving our troops
around the province. But I accepted that perhaps there was no such
thing as a ‘safe way’.
Ken Maginnis MP, whose constituency was yet again the scene of
this tragedy, came in to see me over lunch, accompanied by a local
farmer who had been first on the scene and a surgeon at the local
hospital who had operated on some of the wounded. Then that
evening I held a long meeting with Tom King, Archie and the security
forces chiefs for the province.
Although the bus had been travelling on a forbidden route this did
not seem to be material to what had happened. The IRA had from
1986 acquired access to Semtex explosive material, produced in
Czechoslovakia and probably supplied through Libya. This substance
was extremely powerful, light and relatively safe to use and as a result

had given the terrorists a new technical advantage. The device could,
therefore, have been planted very quickly and so the attack could have
occurred on either route. It was also clear that the IRA had been
planning their campaign for some time. The RUC reported that the
terrorists were well prepared and had been successful in bringing large
quantities of arms and explosives from the South. We then went on to
discuss the co-ordination of intelligence, security co-operation with the
Republic, the need to control the availability of fertilizers (which
could be used as a basis for making bombs), the position on sentencing
and remission and other matters. I called for more papers on all these
subjects and for a vigorous follow-through on all the issues of security
which I had raised after the murder of our soldiers in West Belfast
earlier in the year.
Later that month I held several meetings to go through in detail
what further action we should take. On the evening of Tuesday 6
September I chaired a meeting of the ministers and officials concerned.
I noted that the expected IRA offensive had materialized. We had a
number of possible proposals for action. But we would not be
announcing a package of measures. Some would become public
knowledge as they were implemented or introduced in Parliament. But
in other areas I wanted to keep the terrorists guessing. Consequently it
would not be possible to brief the Irish Government on our intentions,
although we would inform them of individual measures shortly before
their introduction.
Then we went through the possibilities one by one. Some
measures…like the proscription of Sinn Fein or the removal of British
citizenship from undesirables with British/Irish dual citizenship,* or
the introduction of minimum sentences for terrorist offences…looked
less promising the more they were discussed. But others…cutting back
on the 50 per cent remission for all prisoners in Northern Ireland,
ensuring that those convicted of certain terrorist offences would serve
consecutively with a new sentence the unexpired portion of an earlier
remitted sentence, measures to deal with terrorist finance,
improvement of intelligence co-ordination…all these required further
work.
I continued to go through the possibilities with ministers at a second
meeting on the afternoon of Thursday 29 September. At this meeting I
particularly concentrated on the army’s role. It was important to
reduce the number of unnecessary commitments of army manpower in
Northern Ireland in order to allow them to concentrate their efforts
where they were most required.
One measure which we announced publicly in October was the
prohibition of broadcast statements by Sinn Fein and other Northern
Irish supporters of terrorism. This immediately provoked cries of
censorship: but I have no doubt that not only was it justified but that
it has worked, and there is some reason to believe that the terrorists
think so too. Measures to cut Northern Ireland remission and to

change the ‘right to silence’ in Northern Irish courts were also
introduced, as was action against terrorist finance.
More and more in the struggle to bring peace and order to Northern
Ireland, we were being forced back on our own resources. Because of
the professionalism and experience of our security forces, those
resources were adequate to contain, but not as yet to defeat the IRA.
Terrible tragedies continued to occur. Yet the terrorists did not
manage to make even parts of the province ungovernable, nor were
they successful in undermining the self-confidence of Ulster’s majority
community or the will of the Government to maintain the Union.
The fact remained that the contribution which the Anglo-Irish
Agreement was making to all this was very limited. The Unionists
continued to oppose it…though with less bitterness as it became clear
that their worst fears had proved unfounded. It never seemed worth
pulling out of the agreement altogether because this would have
created problems not only with the Republic but, more importantly,
with broader international opinion as well.
Still, I was disappointed by the results. The Patrick Ryan case
demonstrated just how little we could seriously hope for from the
Irish. Ryan, a nonpractising Catholic priest, was well known in
security service circles as a terrorist; for some time he had played a
significant role in the Provisional IRA’s links with Libya. The charges
against Ryan were of the utmost seriousness, including conspiracy to
murder and explosives offences. In June 1988 we had asked the
Belgians to place him under surveillance. They, in turn, pressed us
strongly to apply for extradition. So the application was made in close
cooperation with the Belgian authorities. The Belgian court which
considered the extradition request gave an advisory opinion, which we
knew to have been favourable…something which the Belgian
Government never denied…to the Minister of Justice. The latter then
took the decision to the Belgian Cabinet. The Cabinet decided to
ignore the court’s opinion and to fly Ryan to Ireland, only telling us
afterwards. Presumably this political decision was prompted by fear of
terrorist retaliation if the Belgians co-operated with us.
We now sought the extradition of Ryan from the Republic; but this
was refused, initially on what seemed a technicality, though the Irish
Attorney-General later suggested that Ryan would not receive a fair
trial before a British jury. I wrote a vigorous protest to Mr Haughey. I
had already taken up the matter personally with him and with the
Belgian Prime Minister, M. Martens, at the European Council in
Rhodes on Friday 2 and Saturday 3 December 1988. I told both of
them how appalled I was. I was particularly angry with M. Martens. I
reminded him how his Government’s attitude contrasted with all the
co-operation we had given Belgium over those British people charged
in relation to the Heysel Football Stadium riot.* I was unconvinced and
unmoved by M. Martens’s explanations. His Government had clearly
taken its decision in contradiction to and in defiance of legal advice.

As I warned him I would, I then told the press of my views in very
similar terms. But as a Belgian government under the same M. Martens
later showed at the time of the Gulf War, it would take more than this
to provide them with a spine. And Patrick Ryan is still at large.
I had moved Peter Brooke to become Northern Ireland Secretary in
the reshuffle of July 1989. Peter’s family connections with the
province and his deep interest in Ulster affairs made him seem an ideal
choice. His unflappable good humour also meant that no one would be
better suited for trying to bring the parties of Northern Ireland
together for talks. Soon after his appointment I authorized him to do
so: these talks were still continuing at the time I left office.
Meanwhile, the struggle to maintain security continued. So did the
IRA’s murderous campaign. On Friday 22 September ten bandsmen
were killed in a blast at the Royal Marines School of Music at Deal.
The following summer the IRA’s mainland campaign resumed. June
1990 saw bombs explode outside Alistair McAlpine’s former home and
then at the Conservative Party’s Carlton Club. But it was the following
month that I experienced again something of that deep personal grief I
had felt when Airey was killed and when I learned, early on that
Friday morning at Brighton in 1984, of the losses in the Grand Hotel
bomb attack.
Ian Gow was singled out to be murdered by the IRA because they
knew that he was their unflinching enemy. Even though he held no
government office, Ian was a danger to them because of his total
commitment to the Union. No amount of terror can succeed in its aim
if even a few outspoken men and women of integrity and courage dare
to call terrorism murder and any compromise with it treachery. Nor,
tragically, was Ian someone who took his own security precautions
seriously. And so the IRA’s bomb killed him that Monday morning, 30
July, as he started up his car in the drive of his house. I could not help
thinking, when I heard what had happened, that my daughter Carol
had travelled with Ian in his car the previous weekend to take the
Gows’ dog out for a walk: it might have been her too. I went down to
Eastbourne to see Jane Gow in the early afternoon and we spoke for
an hour or so. That evening I went to a service in the Anglo-Catholic
church where Ian and Jane always worshipped and I was moved to see
it full of people who had come in from work at the end of the day to
mourn Ian’s loss. Whenever Jane came to Chequers to see me she used
to play the piano there…she is a fine pianist. She once remarked to
me, speaking of the loss of Ian, ‘people say it gets better, but it
doesn’t.’ That must always be true of someone you love, whatever the
manner of their death. But for some reason the loss of a friend or
family member by violence leaves an even deeper scar.
The IRA will not give up their campaign unless they are convinced
that there is no possibility of forcing the majority of the people of
Northern Ireland against their will into the Republic. That is why our
policy must never give the impression that we are trying to lead the

Unionists into a united Ireland either against their will or without
their knowledge. Moreover, it is not enough to decry individual acts of
terrorism but then refuse to endorse the measures required to defeat it.
That applies to American Irish who supply Noraid with money to kill
British citizens; to Irish politicians who withhold co-operation in
clamping down on border security; and to the Labour Party that for
years has withheld its support from the Prevention of Terrorism Act
which has saved countless lives.
Ian Gow and I had our disagreements, above all about the AngloIrish Agreement: but for the right of those whose loyalties are to the
United Kingdom to remain its citizens and enjoy its protection I
believe, as did Ian, that no price is too high to pay.
In dealing with Northern Ireland, successive governments have
studiously refrained from security policies that might alienate the Irish
Government and Irish nationalist opinion in Ulster, in the hope of
winning their support against the IRA. The Anglo-Irish Agreement was
squarely in this tradition. But I discovered the results of this approach
to be disappointing. Our concessions alienated the Unionists without
gaining the level of security co-operation we had a right to expect. In
the light of this experience it is surely time to consider an alternative
approach.

The National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations…the voluntary wing of
the Party.
*

In this chapter and elsewhere nationalist is generally used as an alternative to
‘Catholic’ and Unionist to ‘Protestant’. While it is true that the political and ethnic
division in Northern Ireland is largely (though not always) consistent with and
sometimes worsened by religious division, it is misleading to describe it in essentially
religious terms. The IRA gunmen who murder and the hunger strikers who committed
suicide are not in any proper sense ‘Catholic’ nor are ‘loyalist’ sectarian killers
‘Protestant’. They are not even in any meaningful sense Christians.
*

A system of majority rule had existed in the province from the creation of Northern
Ireland in the partition of 1920 until 1972, known as ‘Stormont’ (from the location of
government buildings on the edge of Belfast).
*

*

See pp. 56–9.

Convicted criminals sentenced to more than nine months’ imprisonment who claimed
political motivation and were acceptable to the paramilitary leaders in the gaols were
accorded special category status…allowed to wear their own clothes, exempted from
work, and segregated in compounds.
*

*

See pp. 191, 216, 223, 225.

Prisoners on the mainland received 33 per cent remission: we acted to remove this
extraordinary anomaly by reducing remission in Northern Ireland to the same level the
following year.
*

Internment…detention without trial…had been introduced at the height of the
troubles in 1971, and phased out by 1975.
**

The Stalker-Sampson Report was the outcome of a police enquiry into a series of fatal
incidents in 1982 in which the RUC was alleged to have operated a ‘shoot-to-kill’
policy in dealing with terrorist suspects.
*

The ‘Birmingham Six’ were six Irishmen convicted of multiple murders resulting
from the IRA bombing of two pubs in Birmingham in 1974. A long campaign was
undertaken to prove the convictions unsafe, eventually resulting in their release. At
this time, however, their latest appeal had just been rejected by the Court of Appeal.
**

In Irish law every person born in Ireland is an Irish citizen from birth, but those born
in Northern Ireland do not become Irish citizens unless they declare themselves so to
be.
*

British football fans had attacked Italian fans at the Heysel Stadium in Brussels in
1985, crushing thirty-eight of them to death when a wall collapsed. Twenty-six were
later extradited from Britain to face charges in Belgium.
*

CHAPTER XV

Keeps Raining all the Time
The mid-term political difficulties of 1985–1986

A POLITICAL MALAISE
Whatever long-term political gains might accrue from the successful
outcome of the miners’ strike, from the spring of 1985 onwards we
faced accumulating political difficulties. Matters of no great
importance in themselves, and often of limited interest to the general
public, were invested within the hyperactive and incestuous world of
Westminster with huge significance. The phenomenon is by no means
uniquely British: my American friends tell me frequently of the gulf
which separates the priorities of the ‘beltway’ from those outside it. So
any democratic politician must be able to distinguish between the two
— and recognize the pre-eminence of the second.
That spring the Labour Party started to move ahead of us in the
opinion polls. In the local elections in May we lost control of a number
of shire counties, mainly to the benefit of the SDP/Liberal Alliance.
Francis Pym took the opportunity to launch a new grouping of
Conservative MPs critical of my policies. The group was officially
known as ‘Centre Forward’. Its failure to come up with any coherent
alternative, however, caused it to be dubbed in a Times editorial as
‘Centre Backward’. A number of Francis’s supporters hurried to
disclaim any connection with the group and after the initial flurry of
publicity it sank into oblivion. But that did not alter the fact that, as
the columns of the press showed daily, there were rumblings of dissent
within the Parliamentary Party. I could not ignore them.
Opinions frayed further in July — always a bad-tempered time in
British politics as MPs become restless to return to their constituencies,
or in some cases to their villas in Chianti-shire. On Thursday 4 July we
had a spectacularly bad by-election result at Brecon and Radnor,
which was won by the Alliance on a swing of almost 16 per cent from
the Conservatives: our candidate came in third. It was described — not
quite accurately — as the worst Tory defeat since 1962. By-election
results always have to be taken seriously, even though they are a poor
indication of what would happen at a general election when people
know they are voting for a government rather than registering a
protest. But the press was full of unattributable criticism of the
Government and of me personally which, having about it an
unmistakeable whiff of panic, confirmed that the Parliamentary Party
had a bad case of the wobbles.

Then a fortnight later the publication of our acceptance of the Top
Salary Review Board (TSRB) recommendations provided the occasion
for a large back-bench revolt in the House of Commons. What caused
the outrage was the large increases for top civil servants. There was no
doubt in my mind that we could not retain the right people in vitally
important posts in government administration unless their salaries
bore at least some comparison with their counterparts in the private
sector. The cost of doing this to the public purse was, of course, only a
tiny fraction of even a modest increase to large groups of public sector
workers. I came to the conclusion that it was best to put the anomaly
right at one go. When the Labour Party erupted I reminded them that
Jim Callaghan had done the same thing in 1978. That said, we did not
handle the issue well. Fear of leaks meant that those entrusted with
explaining the rationale of our policy simply did not know about it in
time. Even Bernard Ingham had been kept in the dark which, when he
raised the matter with me afterwards, I conceded was absurd. In future
we handled the TSRB announcements much more carefully. But for
this occasion the damage had been done.
Generally, a political malaise spreads because underlying economic
conditions are bad or worsening. But this was not the case on this
occasion. True, inflation had moved upwards from the low point it had
reached after the election and unemployment, always a lagging
indicator, remained stubbornly high; but the economy was growing
quite fast. It became clear to me that the root of our problems was
presentation and therefore personnel. Of course, there is a tendency
for all governments — particularly Conservative governments — to
blame presentation and not policy for their woes: but in 1985 it really
was the case that some ministers were not in the right jobs and could
not explain our policies to the people. So there was only one way of
changing the image of the Government and that was by changing its
members. A reshuffle was required.
THE 1985 RESHUFFLE
My first discussion about the 1985 reshuffle was with Willie Whitelaw
and John Wakeham, now Chief Whip, over supper in the flat at No. 10
in late May. Willie and John were both shrewd and party to the gossip
which constitutes parliamentary opinion. Each had his own personal
likes and dislikes, which I would privately try to discount, but I
listened to their advice very carefully. They urged on me a July
reshuffle. I could not agree with them. I hated sacking ministers and I
could not prevent myself thinking what it meant to them and their
families, suddenly losing salary, car and prestige.* I used to like to feel
that they would have the long summer recess in office before coming
back in September to learn the bad news. The trouble was that the
press would then spend the whole of that period speculating on who
was to stay and who would go. So I eventually agreed to reshuffles at

the end of July; but not yet.
Planning a reshuffle is immensely complex. There is never a perfect
outcome. It is necessary to get the main decisions about the big offices
of state right and then work outward and downward from these. Nor is
it possible always to give the best positions to one’s closest supporters.
Not only must the Cabinet to some extent reflect the varying views in
the Parliamentary Party at a particular time: there are some people
that it is better to bring in because they would cause more trouble
outside. Peter Walker and, to a lesser extent, Kenneth Clarke are
examples, precisely because they fought their corner hard. There is
another problem: I generally found that the Left seemed to be best at
presentation, the Right at getting the job done — although Norman
Tebbit and Cecil Parkinson managed to do both.
I wanted to ensure that the Government’s policies were presented
properly between now and the general election. This meant some
movement in the most senior three posts — Chancellor, Foreign
Secretary and Home Secretary. Nigel Lawson was turning out to be an
effective tax-reforming Chancellor. Geoffrey Howe seemed a
competent Foreign Secretary; I had not yet taken the full measure of
our disagreements. Leon Brittan was the obvious candidate to be
moved: however unfairly, he just did not carry conviction with the
public. I knew that he would be devastated, but it had to be done.
I asked Leon to come to Chequers on Sunday afternoon 1 September
where Willie, John and I were putting the final touches to the
decisions. Willie is a good judge of character. He told me that the first
thing Leon would ask when I broke the news to him was whether he
would keep his order of precedence in the Cabinet list. To my surprise,
this was indeed what he asked. Forewarned, I was able to reassure
him. I was also able to say — and mean it — that with complex
Financial Services legislation coming up to provide a framework of
regulation for the City Leon’s talents would be well employed at the
Department of Trade and Industry to which I was moving him.
I replaced Leon at the Home Office with Douglas Hurd, who looked
more the part, was immensely reassuring to the police, and, though no
one could call him a natural media performer, inspired a good deal of
confidence in the Parliamentary Party. He had become a harder and
wiser man through serving as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
He also knew the department, having earlier been Leon’s number two
there. By and large, it was a successful appointment.
I had to move Leon; but was I right to move him to the DTI?
Although the main fault in what lay ahead certainly resided elsewhere,
Leon’s attitude on going to his new department carried its own
dangers. He was obviously shaken — friends later described him as
somewhat demoralized — and determined to make his political mark.
As a result he proved oversensitive about his position when the
Westland affair blew up. All this made for errors of judgement when
facing a ruthless opponent like Michael Heseltine. It turned out that

the DTI had even more pitfalls for this civilized but not very streetwise
politician than did the Home Office. At the time, however, it seemed
that this was a job which would put Leon less in the limelight, while
making the most of his formidable intellect and phenomenal industry,
which was what I wanted. But even had Leon weathered Westland he
would have found himself in difficulties over the question of
privatizing BL.
Leon’s position turned out therefore to be the key to the plan for the
reshuffle. It might have worked out differently. For I thought long and
hard about bringing Cecil Parkinson back to the Cabinet. I missed his
dry views and great presentational skills. But my advisers were divided
on the merits of doing so and in the end I reluctantly concluded that it
was too soon.
There were three departures from the Cabinet. Nigel Lawson had
become almost as irritated with Peter Rees as Chief Secretary as
Geoffrey Howe had been with John Biffen. Peter was an able tax
lawyer and an amiable colleague. I always got on well with him. But I
took the view that a Chancellor has the right to select his own
subordinates. At Nigel’s request, I replaced Peter with John
MacGregor. John had a good financial brain as he had shown as part
of the Shadow Treasury team. Although I considered him very much a
Ted Heath man, I had been impressed by his acumen and diligence
and felt he would do this demanding job well — which he did.
Grey Gowrie — after only a year in Cabinet, as Leader of the House
of Lords — to my great regret decided that he wanted to earn more
than a Cabinet member who was a peer — and therefore had no MP’s
salary — was able to do. He decided to go back into business. He had
a fine, highly cultivated mind and great style. I had offered him the
job of Secretary of State for Education, planning to keep Keith Joseph,
who I knew was thinking of retirement, as minister without portfolio.
But that was not to be. Keith agreed to stay at Education a little
longer.
I regretted in a different way the loss of Patrick Jenkin. No one
could have been more conscientious than Patrick — loyal, kind,
selfless. But I could not have the constant haemorrhage of political
support which his inability to put over a case in the Department of the
Environment caused. I was becoming increasingly worried about what
to do with the rating system which would be an even more difficult
issue than GLC abolition. So I appointed Ken Baker to succeed Patrick.
It was a good decision. Ken turned the tables on the Left, proved a
superb communicator of our policies and was the foster-father of the
community charge.
I had brought David Young into the Cabinet as minister without
portfolio the previous year and I now had him succeed Tom King, who
went to be Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. It is difficult to
conceive of a greater contrast than David and Tom. I had started off
with a wrong view of Tom King, inherited from Opposition. I had

thought that he was a man with a taste for detail who, when I made
Michael Heseltine Secretary of State for the Environment in 1979,
would complement Michael’s very broad-brush approach. I then made
the uncomfortable discovery that detail was not at all Tom’s forte, as
the way in which we became steadily more enmeshed in almost
incomprehensible formulae for rate support grant amply
demonstrated. At Employment — in particular on the whole question
of trade union political funds where he adopted a half-hearted
compromise — he had not shown himself to best effect. Norman
Tebbit, his predecessor, was unimpressed; and I felt rightly so. At
Northern Ireland, Tom subsequently demonstrated the other side of his
character, which was a robust, manly good sense that won even
hardened opponents to his point of view, at least as far as is possible
in Northern Ireland. Even though from the standpoint of Ulster affairs
it was a slightly difficult time to put in a new Secretary of State, with
negotiation of the Anglo-Irish Agreement in its final stages, Tom went
with good grace and to good effect.
David Young did not claim to understand politics: but he understood
how to make things happen. He had revolutionized the working of the
Manpower Services Commission (MSC) and at the Department of
Employment his schemes for getting the unemployed back into work
made a major contribution to our winning the 1987 general election.
He shared Keith Joseph’s and my view about how the economy
worked and how jobs were created — not by government but by
enterprise. He understood the relationship between the price of labour
and the number of jobs. And he had that sureness of touch in devising
practical projects which make sense in the marketplace that few but
successful businessmen ever acquire. The ‘Action for Jobs’ programme
was the single most effective economic programme we launched in my
term in office. As a general rule I did not bring outsiders directly into
Cabinet, feeling that previous experience of this — as with John
Davies in Ted Heath’s Government — had not been altogether happy.
David Young was an exception and proved eminently worthy of being
so.
If the Government’s presentation was to be improved something had
to be done about Conservative Central Office. Central Office rightly
claims that it is a universal scapegoat for whatever goes wrong. It is
blamed by the Government when the Party is restive or lethargic. It is
blamed by the Party when the Government seems insensitive or out of
touch. But equally there is no doubt that the performance of Central
Office is variable and by this point it was causing alarm. John
Gummer just did not have the political clout or credibility to rally the
troops. I had appointed him as a sort of nightwatchman: but he
seemed to have gone to sleep on the job. It was time for a figure of
weight and authority to succeed him and provide the required
leadership. In many ways, the ideal man seemed to be Norman Tebbit.
Norman is one of the bravest men I have ever met. He will never

deviate on a point of principle — and those principles are ones which
even the least articulate Tory knows he shares.
There were, though, arguments against Norman’s appointment. He
was still not well and would indeed have to undergo more painful
surgery at a very difficult political time for us. He was not a first-class
administrator. I later came to have some vigorous arguments with
him. There were also those who said that he and I were too close
politically. They argued that what was needed, in John Biffen’s foolish
phrase, was a more ‘balanced ticket’, which seemed to me a recipe for
paralysis.
But there was no doubt in my mind that Norman was the man for
the job, and so it proved. I knew he wanted it, though he never asked
me for it. I thought that one day he might succeed me if we won the
election, though Party Chairmanships have generally been something
of a poisoned chalice. Above all, I knew that the rank and file of the
Party would give their all for Norman Tebbit, whom everyone admired
for bearing his sufferings with such heroism, never complaining but
never concealing either that, whatever politics might bring, it was his
own family and Margaret Tebbit’s needs which came first. Norman
was better than an inspiration: he was an example. So I appointed him
Chairman of the Party; he remained a member of the Cabinet as
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. At least for the moment, party
morale soared.
Norman needed a Deputy Chairman who would be able to make
those visits to the Party around the country which Norman’s health
precluded him from doing. Only someone with a high profile already
could do this successfully and I decided that Jeffrey Archer was the
right choice. He was the extrovert’s extrovert. He had prodigious
energy; he was and remains the most popular speaker the Party has
ever had. Unfortunately, as it turned out, Jeffrey’s political judgement
did not always match his enormous energy and fund-raising ability: illconsidered remarks got him and the Party into some awkward scrapes,
but he always got himself out of them.
I also made quite a large number of changes in the ranks of junior
ministers. Two future Cabinet ministers came into the Government —
Michael Howard at the DTI and John Major who moved from the
Whips’ Office to the DHSS. John Major was certainly not known to be
on the right of the Party during his first days as an MP. When as a
whip he came to the annual whips’ lunch at Downing Street with the
other whips he disagreed with me about the importance of getting
taxation down. He argued that there was no evidence that people
would rather pay lower taxes than have better social services. I did not
treat him or his argument kindly and some people, I later heard,
thought that he had ruined his chances of promotion. But in fact I
enjoy an argument and when the whips’ office suggested he become a
junior minister I gave him the job which I myself had done first,
dealing with the complex area of pensions and national insurance. If

that did not alert him to the realities of social security and the
dependency culture, nothing would.
I felt that the reshuffle had given the Party and the Government a
lift. I believed that we had created a stronger administration, good at
both policy and presentation, that could weather any storm and see us
through to the next election. But it was not to be. ‘The best laid
schemes o’ mice an’ men [and women], Gang aft a-gley.’
THE WESTLAND AFFAIR
There are differing views even now of what the Westland affair was
really about. At various times Michael Heseltine claimed that it was
about Britain’s future as a technologically advanced country, the role
of government in industry, Britain’s relationship with Europe and the
United States and the proprieties of constitutional government. Of
course, these are all interesting points for discussion. But Westland
was really about none of these things. Michael Heseltine’s own
personality — not mine or any other member of the Government’s —
alone provides a kind of explanation for what arose. Michael is one of
the most talented people in politics. His talents are selective and
cultivated to what always seemed to me the point of exaggeration. But
anyone who has seen him on television or on a public platform will
quickly accept that they are real enough.
Michael and I are similar in some ways, very different in others. We
are ambitious, single-minded and believe in efficiency and results. But
whereas with me it is certain political principles that provide a
reference point and inner strength, for Michael such things are
unnecessary. His own overwhelming belief in himself is sufficient.
Shortly before Christmas 1985 when the Westland affair was rapidly
getting out of hand he sent me a handwritten letter in which he wrote
that he knew I would ‘understand the depth of [his] convictions in this
matter’. He was all too correct.
My relations with Michael Heseltine had never been easy. When I
became Leader of the Party in 1975 I wanted to move him out of his
post as Shadow Industry spokesman where his interventionist instincts
were out of place. He agreed to take the Environment portfolio on
condition that he did not have to do so in Government. Working with
Hugh Rossi — a great expert on housing — Michael presented our
policy on the sale of council houses very effectively. After our election
victory I offered him the Department of Energy — an important job at
the time, since the fall of the Shah was sending oil prices sharply
upwards. Hearing this, he said that if that was all, he would prefer to
become Secretary of State for the Environment. I bowed to this. There
Michael — assisted by Tom King — did not prove particularly
successful in curbing local authority spending. He came up with no
feasible alternative to the rating system, which was at the root of
much of the problem since many voters did not pay local authority

rates. But Michael was far less interested in local authority finance
than in being ‘Minister for Merseyside’. In that capacity he made a
great impression, which was undoubtedly politically helpful to us.
Though for the most part his efforts had only ephemeral results, I
would not blame him for that: Liverpool has defeated better men than
Michael Heseltine. Apart from the sale of council houses and
Merseyside, what came to obsess Michael was introducing new
management systems into government. This seemed to me a most
commendable interest and I encouraged him, arranging at one point a
seminar with other ministers to discuss it.
But Michael was clearly restless and when John Nott told me that he
did not intend to stand again for the next Parliament, I decided to give
Michael his big chance and put him into Defence. There Michael’s
strengths and weaknesses were both apparent. He defended our
approach to nuclear arms with great panache and inflicted a series of
defeats on CND and the Labour Left. He reorganized the MoD,
rationalizing its traditional federal structure. Supported by me in the
face of departmental obstruction, he brought in Peter Levene to run
defence procurement on sound business lines.
These were real achievements. But Michael’s sense of priorities was
gravely distorted by his personal ambitions and political obsessions.
For while Michael Heseltine was becoming increasingly obsessed with
a small West Country helicopter company with a turnover of
something over £300 million, far more important issues escaped his
interest. In particular, the Nimrod Airborne Early Warning System
project which would have to be cancelled by George Younger in
December 1986 after £660 million had been spent was running into
grave difficulties while Michael Heseltine was at Defence. It would
have been inconceivable for Leon Brittan, who was to fare so badly at
Michael’s hands, to have let such a situation continue. The Nimrod
affair constituted a unique — and uniquely costly — lesson in how not
to monitor and manage defence procurement. A minister has to be
prepared to work through the details if he is going to come to the right
decisions and this Michael was always unwilling to do.
However complex the psychological drives of Michael Heseltine, the
basic issue at stake in Westland was clear enough. It was whether the
directors and shareholders of a private sector firm, heavily but not
exclusively dependent on government orders, should be free to decide
its future, or whether government should do so. In this sense an
important issue was indeed at stake in Westland. If government
manipulates its purchasing power, if it arbitrarily changes the rules
under which a particular company’s financial decisions have to be
made, and if it then goes on to lobby directly for a particular
commercial option — these things are abuses of power. All my
reading, thinking and experience has taught me that once the state
plays fast and loose with economic freedom, political freedom risks
being the next casualty.

The Westland helicopter company was small by international
aerospace standards but it was Britain’s only helicopter manufacturer.
Unlike the bulk of the aerospace industry it was never nationalized by
the Labour Government and was reasonably profitable into the early
1980s. It then began to run into financial trouble. Mr Alan Bristow bid
for the company in April 1985 and it was in the light of this that on 30
April Michael Heseltine informed me and other members of the
Cabinet’s Overseas and Defence Committee of the Ministry of
Defence’s view of Westland. Westland hoped to obtain an order from
the Indian Government for helicopters partly financed from our
Overseas Aid budget. But they were also looking to the MoD for
crucial new orders: from Michael’s minute it was clear that they would
look in vain. He made no suggestion at this stage that Westland was of
strategic significance to Britain. Indeed, he emphasized that he would
not wish to give the company extra orders for which there was no
defence need. He added that even with the best will in the world it
was difficult to see a single British specialist helicopter company
competing in worldwide markets in the longer term.
In mid-June we learned that Mr Bristow was threatening to
withdraw his bid unless the Government provided assurances of future
MoD orders and agreed to waive its right to repayment of over £40
million of launch aid provided by the DTI for Westland’s latest
helicopter. I held a series of meetings with Michael Heseltine, Norman
Tebbit, Nigel Lawson and others. At the meeting on Wednesday 19
June Michael suggested a scheme by which we could provide £30
million in aid to the company, but explained that what was important
to the defence programme was not the existing Westland company but
rather Britain’s capability to service existing helicopters and to
develop the EH101 project (see below). In spite of that, we all agreed
that it was desirable to avoid Westland going into receivership, which
appeared likely if the Bristow bid was withdrawn. In the end we
decided that rather than provide aid to the company in the midst of a
takeover bid (which in any case might have breached company law),
Norman Tebbit should encourage the Bank of England to bring
together the main creditors with the object of putting in new
management and developing a recovery strategy as an alternative to
receivership.
As a result Mr Bristow withdrew his bid and in due course Sir John
Cuckney took over as Chairman, bringing his extraordinary talents to
the task of securing Westland’s future. Shortly afterwards it emerged
that a large privately owned American company was considering
making a bid for Westland. The new Westland management opposed
this particular bid. Norman Tebbit and Michael Heseltine were also
against it. But while noting the general arguments against an
American takeover I made it clear even at this stage that a different
American offer would have to be judged on its merits.

The situation of Westland was one of the first difficult issues which
Leon Brittan had to face when he took over at the DTI in September.
On Friday 4 October Leon sent me a thorough assessment of the
position. The matter was urgent. It seemed likely that the company
would have to go into receivership if a solution could not be found
before the end of November. Leon urged me to take up the issue of
India’s proposed helicopter order with Rajiv Gandhi when he visited
Britain in October. As part of the proposed financial reconstruction of
the company the Government was asked to underwrite some
helicopter sales. We would also have to decide what to do about the
launch aid, which seemed unlikely to be recovered. What would be the
most controversial aspect of the package put forward by Sir John
Cuckney, however, was the introduction of a new large minority
shareholder to raise new capital. No British company was prepared to
take such a shareholding. The most likely candidate was the large
American company, Sikorsky. Westland were in contact with their
European counterparts, but the prospects of a European solution
within the timetable did not look good.
It was from a note of a meeting on Wednesday 16 October between
Leon Brittan and Michael Heseltine that I first read about Michael
Heseltine’s concern that Sikorsky would turn Westland into ‘merely a
metal bashing operation’. Michael did not wish to go so far as to
oppose Sikorsky’s taking the 29.9 per cent in any circumstances, but
he did think it important to make every effort to find an acceptable
European shareholder instead. More ominously, he apparently did not
think that Sir John Cuckney was the right person to deal with
negotiations with the European companies, since the latter looked to
their governments for guidance in such matters. Michael argued that
the approaches needed to be made at a political level by the Ministry
of Defence.

It was now becoming clear that the preference of the Westland
board was likely to be for Sikorsky, while Michael Heseltine’s
preference was very different. Other things being equal, we would all
have preferred a European solution. Since 1978, European
governments had agreed to make every effort to meet their needs with
helicopters made in Europe. This did not, of course, mean that we
were bound to rule out purchases of non-European helicopters, but it
did obviously incline us in the European direction.
I still do not understand why anyone later imagined that the
Westland board, Leon Brittan and I were all biased against a European
option. In fact, the Government bent over backwards to give that
option and Michael Heseltine every opportunity to advance their
arguments and interests. Yet in the frenzy which followed there was
almost no limit to the deviousness and manipulation we were accused
of employing to secure Sikorsky its minority holding.
At the end of November the opposition between the Westland
board’s views and Michael Heseltine came out into the open. Sikorsky

made an offer for a substantial stake in Westland which the Westland
board was inclined to accept. But entirely off his own bat Michael now
called together a meeting of the National Armaments Directors (NADs)
of France, Italy and Germany as well as the United Kingdom to agree a
document under which the respective governments would refrain from
buying helicopters other than those designed and built in Europe. This
was more than a blatant departure from the Government’s policy of
maximizing competition to get the best value for money: it also placed
Westland in an almost impossible position. There was now an obvious
risk that if Westland concluded its deal with Sikorsky it would not be
deemed to meet the NADs criterion and would be excluded from all
further orders from the four governments, including the UK. It was my
view — and Leon Brittan’s — that the Government must not seek to
prevent any particular solution to Westland’s problems: it must be for
the company to decide what to do. Yet by a stroke of a pen Michael
Heseltine was effectively ruling out the company’s preferred option for
its future. If Westland were to be able to make a free decision it would
be necessary for the Government to overrule the NADs decision. This,
of course, meant overruling Michael.
I realized that we might have to do this. Although these were
essentially matters for the company, the closer that we looked at the
European option the less substantial did it seem. The three European
companies concerned — Aérospatiale (France), MBB (West Germany)
and Agusta (Italy) — were, as Michael certainly knew, subject to
pressure from their own governments. Aérospatiale and Agusta were
state-owned and MBB was substantially financed by the West German
Government. All the European companies were short of work and
promises of more work for Westland from Europe seemed likely to
remain just promises. By contrast, Westland had been collaborating
with Sikorsky for several decades and had produced a number of
models under licence from them. Indeed, most of not just Westland’s
but Agusta’s existing helicopter designs were of American origin.
Michael Heseltine argued that if Sikorsky took even a minority stake in
Westland they would use their position to put pressure on the Ministry
of Defence to order American-designed Blackhawk helicopters. In fact,
it was widely rumoured that the armed services would have liked the
MoD to do just that rather than wait for the European equivalent
which was now still only at the stage of feasibility study. My own
personal view of all this was of little importance, but I could well
understand, as would anyone else conversant with the facts, why
Westland had their preference for the American option and how angry
they and Sikorsky were with Michael Heseltine’s manoeuvrings.
Nor, by now, was the ‘American’ option American only. Sikorsky
had been joined by Fiat in their bid. Not to be outdone, however,
Michael Heseltine suddenly revealed that British Aerospace would be
ready to join the European consortium, thus making it less ‘foreign’.
There were several accounts of how precisely this had occurred: I had

my own opinions.
I held two meetings with Michael Heseltine, Leon Brittan, Willie
Whitelaw, Geoffrey Howe, Norman Tebbit and Nigel Lawson to discuss
Westland on Thursday 5 December and the following day. (British
Aerospace entered the field between the first and second meetings.) By
the time of the second meeting Michael had totally changed his line
from the one he had pursued in April. Suddenly the issue had become
whether it was right to allow a significant British defence contractor to
come under foreign control. But the real issue was whether the
Government should reject the recommendation from the NADs, thus
leaving Westland to reach their decision whether to accept the
Sikorsky offer or that from the European consortium on
straightforward commercial grounds. By the end of the second meeting
it was clear that for most of us the argument had been won by Leon
Brittan: the NADs decision should be set aside. But Geoffrey, Norman
and, of course, Michael strongly dissented and so I decided that a
decision should be reached in a formal Cabinet Committee. ‘E’(A)*
enlarged as appropriate would meet on Monday 9 December.
Over the weekend the pace quickened and tempers frayed. Michael
Heseltine blocked a joint MoD and DTI paper on Westland and had it
redrafted to emphasize the risks of a Sikorsky bid. Leon Brittan was
furious, but allowed it to go forward to ‘E’(A). This was a mistake.
Michael said that the French Defence minister also telephoned over
the weekend to place unspecified sub-contract work on the ‘Super
Puma’ helicopter with Westland provided it was not sold to Sikorsky.
Monday morning’s newspapers covered the row between Michael and
Leon.
The main argument of substance which Michael Heseltine advanced
was that the attitude of the Europeans to a Sikorsky deal would
jeopardize future collaboration between Westland and the European
defence companies. Some of this work was certainly important.
Westland’s collaboration with Agusta on a large helicopter known as
the EH101 was due to become the main basis of its business in later
years. By contrast, the projected troop-carrying helicopter known as
the NH90 was at a very early stage. In fact these fears were
exaggerated. Though the NH90 was abandoned in April 1987, the
EH101 subsequently went ahead successfully. Neither decision had
anything to do with the ownership of Westland.
But the real sleight of hand was Michael’s suggestion that as a result
of the recommendations of NADs two projected European battlefield
helicopters — an Anglo-Italian model and a Franco-German one —
could be rationalized and that the savings in development costs which
for the UK might amount to £25 million over the next five years would
become available for extra work for Westland. This would enable
additional helicopter orders to be placed by the MoD to help fill the
gap in production work. Whether or not one thought that this £25
million was in fact likely to be saved or whether this was the best way

to spend it seemed almost beside the point. It appeared that for
Michael Heseltine the procurement budget of the MoD and
arrangements with other governments were to be manipulated in
whatever way necessary to secure his own preferred future for this
modest helicopter company. What small sense of proportion Michael
possessed had vanished entirely.
At the ‘E’(A) meeting on 9 December Sir John Cuckney, who had
been invited to attend and speak, brought matters down to earth.
Westland needed fundamental reconstruction and an improved
product range and it was the view of his board that this was best met
by Sikorsky. The longer it took to make the decision the greater would
be the pressure on the share price. Westland’s accounts were due to be
published on 11 December and the company could not maintain
market confidence if publication was delayed much beyond that.
There was a majority at the meeting in favour of overturning the
NADs’ recommendation, but instead of terminating the discussion and
summing up the feeling of the meeting in favour of that, I gave
Michael Heseltine (and Leon Brittan) permission to explore urgently
the possibility of developing a European package which the Westland
board could finally accept. But if this had not been done and a
package which the Westland board could recommend had not been
produced by 4 p.m. on Friday 13 December, we would be obliged to
reject the NADs recommendation.
In fact, the Westland board did not accept the European bid and
chose to recommend that from Sikorsky-Fiat. But Michael had now
developed another fixation or perhaps tactic. At the ‘E’(A) meeting it
was recognized in discussion that the timetable would allow for
another meeting of ministers before the Friday deadline. But there was
no decision to call a meeting; and indeed none was necessary. What
was the point? Westland’s board knew precisely where they stood: it
was up to them and the shareholders. Michael had already started
muttering. He urged John Wakeham to get me to call another meeting,
saying it was a constitutional necessity under Cabinet government. It
so happened that officials had rung round to see whether people
would be available if a further meeting was called: but that was very
definitely not a summons to a meeting, because no meeting had been
arranged. This was of little consequence, however, because from this
point on Michael became convinced that he was the victim of a plot in
which more and more people seemed to be involved. Obviously, it
now involved Cabinet Office civil servants. Who might be revealed as
a conspirator next?
The next twist came soon. Without any warning Michael raised the
issue of Westland in Cabinet on Thursday 12 December. This provoked
a short, ill-tempered discussion, which I cut short on the grounds that
we could not discuss the issue without papers. Nor was it on the
agenda. The full account of what was said was not circulated, though a
summary record should have been sent round in the minutes.

Unfortunately, by an oversight this was not done. The Cabinet
Secretary noticed the omission himself and rectified it without
prompting. However, Michael Heseltine was not satisfied with the
brief record, complaining that it did not record his ‘protest’. For
Michael the plot was thickening fast.
Michael continued his campaign up to and over Christmas. He
lobbied back-benchers. He lobbied the press. He lobbied bankers. He
lobbied industrialists. GEC, of which Jim Prior was chairman,
mysteriously developed an interest in joining the European
consortium. The consortium itself came forward with a new firm bid.
Each new development was adduced as a reason to review the
Government’s policy. The battle was fought out in the press. There was
an increasingly farcical air about the affair, which was making the
Government look ridiculous. There was even a completely contrived
‘Libyan scare’. Michael Heseltine suggested that the long-standing
involvement of the Libyan Government in Fiat raised security
questions about the Sikorsky bid. In fact, Fiat would have owned 14.9
per cent of Westland and Libya owned 14 per cent of Fiat. Fiat already
supplied many important components for European defence
equipment. The Americans, who were even more sensitive than we
were about both security and Libya, seemed quite content for Fiat to
be involved with Sikorsky.
I rejected Michael’s argument that we needed now to come down in
favour of the European bid. But the public row between Michael and
Leon continued over Christmas.
Westland’s board were still extremely anxious about whether they
could look forward to British and European government business. In
answer to John Cuckney, I wrote to say that ‘as long as Westland
continues to carry on business in the UK, the Government will of
course continue to regard it as a British and therefore European
company and will support it in pursuing British interests in Europe.’
Michael had wanted to include a good deal of other less reassuring
material in my reply but I rejected this. Imagine, therefore, my
admiration when I found early in the New Year that Lloyds Merchant
Bank had sent him a letter which enabled him to make all the points
in his published reply about what — in Michael’s view — would
happen if Westland chose Sikorsky rather than the bid of the European
consortium. It was in response to Michael’s letter that the SolicitorGeneral wrote to him of ‘material inaccuracies’. The leaking of the
Solicitor-General’s letter to the press magnified the Westland crisis and
eventually led to Leon Brittan’s resignation; but all that lay in the
future.
I now knew from Michael’s behaviour that unless he were checked
there were no limits to what he would do to secure his objectives at
Westland. Cabinet collective responsibility was being ignored and my
own authority as Prime Minister was being publicly flouted. This had
to stop.

Westland was placed on the agenda for the Cabinet of Thursday 9
January. At that meeting I began by rehearsing the decisions which
had been made by the Government. I then ran over the damaging
press comment which there had been in the New Year. I said that if
the situation continued, the Government would have no credibility
left. I had never seen a clearer demonstration of the damage done to
the coherence and standing of a Government when the principle of
collective responsibility was ignored. Leon Brittan then Michael
Heseltine put their respective cases. After some discussion, I began to
sum up by pointing out that the time was approaching when the
company and its bankers at a shareholders’ meeting had to decide
between the two consortia. It was legally as well as politically
important that they should come to their decision without further
intervention directly or indirectly by ministers or by other people
acting on their behalf. That must be accepted and observed by
everyone and there must be no lobbying or briefing directly or
indirectly. Because of the risks of misinterpretation during this period
of sensitive commercial negotiations and decisions, answers to
questions should be cleared inter-departmentally through the Cabinet
Office so as to ensure that all answers given were fully consistent with
the policy of the Government.
Everyone else accepted this. But Michael Heseltine said that it
would be impossible to clear every answer through the Cabinet Office
and that although he did not envisage making any new statements he
must be able to confirm statements already made and answer
questions of fact about procurement requirements without any delay. I
suspect that no one present saw this as anything other than a ruse. No
one sided with Michael. He was quite isolated. I again summed up,
repeating my earlier remarks and adding that consideration should
also be given to the preparation under Cabinet Office auspices of an
interdepartmentally agreed fact sheet which could be drawn upon as a
source of answers to questions. I then emphasized the importance of
observing collective responsibility in this and in all matters. At this
Michael Heseltine erupted. He claimed that there had been no
collective responsibility in the discussion of Westland. He alleged a
breakdown in the propriety of Cabinet discussions. He could not
accept the decision recorded in my summing up. He must therefore
leave the Cabinet. He gathered his papers together and left a Cabinet
united against him.
I have learnt that other colleagues at the meeting were stunned by
what had happened. I was not. Michael had made his decision and
that was that. I already knew whom I wanted to succeed him at
Defence: George Younger was precisely the right man for the job,
which I knew he wanted.
I called a short break and walked through to the Private Office.
Nigel Wicks, my principal private secretary, brought George Younger
out; I offered him, and he accepted, the Defence post. I asked my

office to telephone Malcolm Rifkind to offer him George’s former post
of Scottish Secretary, which he too subsequently accepted. We
contacted the Queen to ask her approval of these appointments. Then I
returned to Cabinet, continued the business and by the end of the
meeting I was able to announce George Younger’s appointment.
Within the Cabinet at least all had been settled.
I had no illusion about the storm which would now break. And yet it
remained a storm in a teacup, a crisis created from a small issue by a
giant ego. Whether Michael Heseltine had come to the Cabinet having
decided to resign I do not know. But the speed with which he was able
to prepare the twenty-two-minute statement he delivered that
afternoon, detailing my alleged misdemeanours, at least suggests that
he was well prepared. I knew that, whatever disagreements there
might be between me and other members of the Cabinet, they had
witnessed for themselves that Michael was in the wrong.
As it happened, the main task of replying to Michael Heseltine fell to
Leon Brittan. When the House reassembled on Monday 13 January, at
a meeting that morning Willie, Leon, George, the Chief Whip and
others discussed with me what should be done. It was decided that
Leon, rather than I, would make a statement on Westland in the House
that afternoon. It went disastrously wrong. Michael Heseltine trapped
Leon with a question about whether any letters from British Aerospace
had been received bearing on a meeting which Leon had had with Sir
Raymond Lygo, the Chief Executive of British Aerospace. It was
suggested (as it transpired quite falsely) that at his meeting with Sir
Raymond Lygo Leon had said that British Aerospace’s involvement in
the European consortium was against the national interest and that
they should withdraw. The letter in question which had arrived at No.
10 and which I saw just before coming over to the House to listen to
Leon’s statement had been marked ‘Private and Strictly Confidential’.
Leon felt that he had to respect that confidence, but in doing so he
used a lawyer’s formulation which opened him to the charge of
misleading the House of Commons. He had to return to the House later
that night to make an apology. In itself it was a small matter; but in
the atmosphere of suspicion and conspiracy fostered by Michael
Heseltine — who mysteriously knew all about this confidential missive
— it did great harm to Leon’s credibility. I defended his action on the
grounds that he had a duty to respect the confidentiality of the letter.
The letter itself was subsequently published with the permission of its
author, Sir Austin Pearce, but it contributed little to the debate since
the day after that Sir Raymond withdrew his allegations as having
been based on a misunderstanding. By then, however, Leon’s political
position was all but irrecoverable.
But none of this made my life any easier when I had to reply to Neil
Kinnock in the debate on Westland on Wednesday 15 January.
My speech was low-key and strictly factual. It demonstrated that we
had reached our decisions on Westland in a proper and responsible

way. Indeed, as I listed all the meetings of ministers, including Cabinet
Committees and Cabinets which had discussed Westland, I half felt
that I had been guilty of wasting too much of ministers’ time on an
issue of relative unimportance. Although it set out all the facts, my
speech was not well received. The press were expecting something
more fiery.
Michael Heseltine spoke, criticizing the way in which collective
responsibility had been discharged over Westland and quite ignoring
the fact that he had walked out of a Cabinet meeting on Westland
because he was the only minister unwilling to abide by a Cabinet
decision.
Leon summed up for the Government in a speech which I hoped
would restore his standing in the House and which seemed a modest
success. The press, however, still kept up the pressure on him and
there was plenty of criticism of me as well. It seemed, though, that
given time we were over the worst. It was not to be. On Thursday 23
January I had to make a difficult statement to the House. It outlined
the results of the leak enquiry into the disclosure of the SolicitorGeneral’s letter of 6 January. The tension was great, speculation at
fever pitch. The enquiry concluded that civil servants at the
Department of Trade and Industry had acted in good faith in the
knowledge that they had the authority of Leon Brittan, their Secretary
of State, and cover from my office at No. 10 for proceeding to reveal
the contents of Patrick Mayhew’s letter. For their part, Leon Brittan
and the DTI believed that they had the agreement of No. 10 to do this.
In fact I was not consulted. It is true that, like Leon, I would have liked
the fact that Michael Heseltine’s letter was thought by Patrick Mayhew
to contain material inaccuracies needing correction to become public
knowledge as soon as possible. Sir John Cuckney was to hold a press
conference to announce the Westland board’s recommendation to its
shareholders that afternoon. But I would not have approved of the
leaking of a law officer’s letter as a way of achieving this.
In my statement I had to defend my own integrity, the professional
conduct of civil servants who could not answer for themselves and, as
far as I could, my embattled Trade and Industry Secretary. I never
doubted that as long as the truth was known and believed all would
ultimately be well. Yet it is never easy to persuade those who think
that they know how government works, but in fact do not, that
misunderstandings and errors of judgement do happen, particularly
when ministers and civil servants are placed under almost impossible
pressure day after day after day, as they were by Michael Heseltine’s
antics.
Alas, Leon’s days were numbered. It was a meeting of the ‘22
Committee, not any decision of mine, which sealed his fate. He came
to see me on the afternoon of Friday 24 January and told me that he
was going to resign. I tried to persuade him not to; I hated to see the
better man lose. His departure from the Cabinet meant the loss of one

of our best brains and cut short what would have been, in other
circumstances, a successful career in British politics. I hoped that he
would return to the Government in due course. But I was by now
thinking hard about my own position. I had lost two Cabinet ministers
and I had no illusions that, as always when the critics sense weakness,
there were those in my own Party and Government who would like to
take the opportunity of getting rid of me as well.
But I also had staunch friends who rallied round. Not the least of
these was President Reagan who telephoned me on Saturday evening
at No. 10. He said that he was furious that anyone had the gall to
challenge my integrity. He wanted me to know that ‘out here in the
colonies’ I had a friend. He urged me to go out ‘and do my darndest’. I
appreciated his call. I told him that this was indeed a difficult moment
but I intended to put my head down and battle through.
I knew that the big test would come in the House of Commons the
following Monday when I was to answer Neil Kinnock once more in an
emergency debate on Westland. I spent the whole of Sunday with
officials and speech writers. I went through all of the papers relating
to the Westland affair from the beginning, clarifying in my own mind
what had been said and done, by whom and when. It was time well
spent.
Neil Kinnock opened the debate that Monday afternoon with a longwinded and ill-considered speech which certainly did him more harm
than it did me. But I knew as I rose to speak that it was my
performance which the House was waiting for. Once again, I went
over all the details of the leaked letter. It was a noisy occasion and
there were plenty of interruptions. But the adrenalin flowed and I gave
as good as I got. The speech does not now read as anything
exceptional. But it undoubtedly turned the tide. I suspect that
Conservative MPs had by now woken up to the terrible damage which
had been done to the Party. They would have found in their
constituencies that weekend that people were incredulous that
something of such little importance could be magnified into an issue
which threatened the Government itself. So by the time I spoke what
Tory MPs really wanted was leadership, frankness and a touch of
humility, all of which I tried to provide. Even Michael Heseltine
deemed it expedient to protest his loyalty.
Some of the details raised in Westland continued to fascinate the
cognoscenti, but they were a small and shrinking band. Westland
shareholders accepted the Sikorsky bid and though there were to be
some difficult times for the company the doom-laden consequences for
it and Britain’s industrial base about which Michael Heseltine had
warned so eloquently never materialized.
Some said I should have sacked Michael weeks before his
resignation. Certainly, there is weight in the criticism that I allowed
Michael too much leeway, not too little. At a meeting in No. 10 on 18
December, Leon Brittan urged me to sack him and was brutally

dismissive of those who on tactical grounds urged the opposite. But it
is necessary to remember two things. First, to begin with the issues
were not as clear-cut as they became. Although, as I was later to stress
to the House of Commons, decisions on defence procurement are for
the Cabinet as a whole not just for the Defence Secretary, Michael
certainly did have a legitimate role to play in deciding Westland’s
future. The problem was that he did not stick to the limits of that role
and not only sought to impose his own views on a private company
but did so without respect for collective responsibility in the
Government. Second, Michael was at that time a popular and powerful
figure in the Party. No one survives for long as Prime Minister without
a shrewd recognition of political realities and risks. It seemed to me
that I should weather the storm best by reacting to events as they
occurred, not trying to bring about a crisis, but sticking to the essential
issues. In retrospect, I think that this paid off. Michael gained plenty of
publicity but did himself great damage by storming out as he did: if he
had not gone voluntarily he might have been still more troublesome
on the back-benches.
But the most damaging effect of the Westland affair was the fuel
which had been poured on the flames of anti-Americanism. And that
fire, once lit, proved difficult to extinguish.
The kind of rhetoric which had been used by Michael Heseltine and
his supporters about the American industrial ‘threat’ in the helicopter
industry certainly touched a raw nerve. The Left always thought the
worst of American motives because they saw the United States as the
most vigorous, powerful and self-confident force for capitalism. Some
on the far right — Enoch Powell with whom I so often agreed on other
matters was the most obvious example — distrusted America on
narrow nationalistic grounds: and for some in the Tory Party the
memories of America’s actions at the time of Suez remained for ever
fresh. The more fanatical European federalists were anti-American for
other reasons: they saw the strong cultural and sentimental links
between Britain and the United States as detracting from our
commitment to Europe. This was essentially an anti-Americanism of
the political élites. But there was also a popular variety, which was
more worrying. The British people by and large did not understand or
properly appreciate President Reagan. And by now the emergence of
Mr Gorbachev in the Soviet Union, someone with an unusual
understanding of how to play on western public opinion and who as a
communist would always receive the benefit of the doubt from the
left-wing media, provided an apparently favourable contrast with
President Reagan. There was a feeling that the Soviets were the model
of sweet reason, the United States of recklessness. These were the rich
seams which Michael Heseltine opened up in the Westland affair and
which others were now to exploit.
BRITISH LEYLAND

On the heels of Westland came the question of privatizing British
Leyland (BL).* Paul Channon, who had been Trade minister at the DTI
and whom I appointed to succeed Leon, was faced within days of
taking office with a fresh crisis and one which unlike Westland
affected the jobs of many thousands of people and concerned a
significant number of Conservative MPs, including ministers.
I had not always seen eye to eye with Norman Tebbit over BL. I felt
that the company was continuing to perform badly and wanted to take
a tougher line with it. There had certainly been improvements.
Productivity was up, days lost by strikes were down, losses were
smaller. But the management was still poor. Moreover, the same old
bromides were used to justify failure. Next year or the year after was
always the time when losses would be turned to profit as long as new
investment was provided by the taxpayer today. The only alternative
to going along with what BL management wanted was its complete
collapse which they rightly thought we could not allow. Forecasts
were always being revised downwards — and then not met. UK
market share hovered around 17 or 18 per cent in spite of expectations
that with its new models BL would have taken 25 per cent. The
company’s 1984 results were unsurprisingly much worse than
predicted. The Government had to stand behind BL’s large and
increasing borrowings under the so-called ‘Varley-Marshall’
assurances.
I wanted to cut back BL’s investment programme and believed that
one way of doing this was to buy in engines from Honda — with
which BL planned to develop its existing collaboration — rather than
for Austin Rover to develop its own new engines. In spite of several
attempts during the spring and summer of 1985, I did not get very far.
I did not feel that the DTI was sufficiently serious and I knew that BL
itself was positively hostile. In such circumstances there is little a
prime minister can do — even one so well advised as I was on these
matters by my Policy Unit* and outside experts.
There must, I felt, be a new management and new Chairman at BL,
tighter financial discipline and, above all, a renewed drive for
privatization. From October 1985 on Leon Brittan concentrated closely
on all these aspects but it was privatization which increasingly took
centre stage. Jaguar had already been successfully sold off. Unipart,
which handled BL’s spare parts, should have been privatized too,
though BL seemed to be reluctant to move ahead with this. But, most
important, we had secretly been in contact with General Motors (GM)
which was interested in acquiring Land Rover, including Range Rover,
Freight Rover (vans) and Leyland Trucks (heavy vehicles). These
negotiations too seemed to drag on and on; so I was pleased when
Leon sent me on 25 November his proposals for moving ahead with
the deal.
Apart from (though having a bearing upon) the price, there were
three tricky questions which required attention.

• First, we had to consider the consequences for jobs of
the rationalization of the GM (Bedford) and BL
(Leyland) truck businesses, which was undoubtedly one
of the attractions for GM of their proposal. We thought
that up to 3000 jobs might go: but the choice in an
industry where there was great overcapacity was not
between job losses and no job losses but between some
jobs going and a possible collapse of one or other — or
conceivably both — truck producers.
• Second, we had to consider the position of the rest of
BL’s operations: the volume car business of Austin
Rover, which would be left to pay off the accumulated
debt, and which GM had no intention themselves of
taking on.
• Third, the thorniest issue would be the future control of
Land Rover, which GM were determined to acquire but
on which public opinion would require safeguards that
it should in some sense ‘stay British’.
Suddenly, however, we were facing an embarras de richesses. Before
we had fully come to grips with the GM offer, code-named ‘Salton’, the
still more intriguingly code-named ‘Maverick’ put in an appearance. At
the end of November the Chairman of Ford of Europe came to see
Leon Brittan to say that Ford were considering making an offer for
Austin Rover and Unipart. The company fully recognized the political
sensitivity of this and it probably also understood how much
opposition to expect from BL, which would much prefer to stick with
its cosier relationship with Honda. So Ford wanted the green light
from the Government first. Leon Brittan, Nigel Lawson and I discussed
what should be done at a meeting on the afternoon of Wednesday 4
December. There was no doubt in our minds of the political difficulties
involved. Although Ford said that they intended to keep the main BL
and Ford plants open there would be opposition from MPs fearful of
job losses in the areas affected. Ford’s productivity was worse than
BL’s, their newest models were not selling well and they were worried
about Japanese penetration of their European markets. There might be
problems about collaboration with Honda on which BL had come to
depend. There were possible criticisms as regards the effect on
competition in car manufacture. But for all that the Ford offer was
certainly worth pursuing. Some people would say that once successful
negotiations had taken place with Ford and GM we would have
disposed of Britain’s own car-making capacity at a stroke. But others
would welcome the privatization, which would end the drain on the
public purse and secure a viable future for the car industry in Britain.
So contacts with Ford went ahead.

Whether we could have succeeded in pushing through this
ambitious privatization programme in a more favourable political
climate must be a matter of speculation. But it could not have come at
a worse time. To Paul Channon’s horror — and mine — at the start of
February the weekend press was full of details of what was planned.
BL had almost certainly leaked it when we were at our most
vulnerable as a result of the Westland affair. On Monday 3 February
Paul Channon had to confirm these contacts in an emergency
statement to the House. All hope of confidential commercial discussion
had been destroyed. Irrationality swept through the debate.
Paul had an almost impossible task, which, however, he undertook
with great courage and skill. A kind of pseudo-patriotic hysteria swept
politics and the media. Ted Heath talked of our responding to the
efforts of workers and management at BL by saying, ‘now we will sell
you out to the Americans.’ Not even the Cabinet was immune. Norman
Fowler, whose constituency was affected by BL, let it be known that he
was fighting the deal. When the Norman Fowlers of this world believe
that they can afford to rebel, you know that things are bad.
I chaired an extremely difficult meeting of the Cabinet on Thursday
6 February in the course of which it became clear to me that there was
no way in which the Ford deal could be put through. In these
circumstances it was essential to limit the damage and try to press
ahead with the negotiations with GM. Paul Channon told the House
that afternoon that in order to end the uncertainty we would not
pursue the possibility of the sale of Austin Rover to Ford. It was
humiliating and did less than justice to Ford, which had provided so
many jobs in Britain. But in politics you have to know when to cut
your losses.
The question now was whether, having relieved the immediate
pressure, we could still strike a satisfactory deal with GM. I saw Paul
after his statement and said that we must push ahead as fast as
possible with this and the sale of Unipart. Now the news was out,
however, we were faced with a rash of alternative bids. Few of them
were serious and all of them were an embarrassment rather than a
help at this late stage. Most politically sensitive was the proposal for a
management buy-out of Land Rover. GM remained — in our and BL’s
view — by far the best option because that company was interested in
all, not just some, divisions; because of its financial strength; and
because of the access to its distribution network.
On Wednesday 19 February I set up a small ministerial group —
what John Biffen would have called a ‘balanced ticket’ — to consider
this increasingly complex and difficult matter. The main members
were Willie Whitelaw, Nigel Lawson, Norman Tebbit, Peter Walker,
John Biffen, Norman Fowler and of course Paul Channon. Paul
remained in charge of the detailed negotiations with GM. These
carried on well into March. Sometimes it looked as if we could gain a
sufficient undertaking from GM as regards control of Land Rover. We

had had to harden our position considerably, insisting that GM could
have no more than 49 per cent voting strength and that GM’s right to
manage the business would be subject to the overriding control of the
(British) board.
GM in the end were not prepared to wear this and I do not blame
them. They were not willing to proceed with a deal for Leyland Trucks
and Freight Rover which excluded Land Rover and so the talks ended.
When this was announced by Paul to the House of Commons on
Tuesday 25 March, one after another of our back-benchers stood up to
say that a great opportunity had been lost and that the GM deal should
have gone through. I did not disguise my irritation with them and told
several later that they should have spoken up when the going was
rough.
This whole sorry episode had harmed not just the Government but
Britain. Time and again I had drawn attention to the benefits Britain
received as a result of American investment. The idea that Ford was
foreign and therefore bad was plainly absurd. Their European
headquarters was located in Britain, as was their largest European
Research and Development Centre. All of the trucks and most of the
tractors that Ford sold in Europe were made in Britain. Ford’s exports
from the UK were 40 per cent more by value than those of BL. Would
Britain have really been better off if BL had taken over Ford? The
notion is ridiculous. But it was not just a matter of Ford. Over half the
investment coming into Britain from abroad was from the United
States. Both Ford and GM were offended and annoyed by the
campaign waged against them. Britain just could not afford to indulge
in self-destructive anti-Americanism of this sort. Yet it would continue
and was shortly to be raised to fever pitch — not just in the area of
industrial policy but that of defence and foreign affairs, where
passions ignite more easily.
THE US RAID ON LIBYA
I was at Chequers on Friday 27 December 1985 when I learnt that
terrorists had opened fire on passengers waiting on the concourse at
the Rome and Vienna Airports, killing seventeen people. It soon
became clear that the gunmen were Palestinian terrorists from the Abu
Nidal group. They had apparently been trained in the Lebanon, but
evidence soon emerged of a Libyan connection. Certainly, the Libyan
Government did not stint in its praise for the attacks, describing them
as ‘heroic actions’. We and the Americans already had a large amount
of shared intelligence about Libya’s support for terrorism. The question
was not whether Colonel Gaddafi headed a terrorist state but rather
what to do about it. Britain had adopted a much tougher attitude
towards Libya than other European countries ever since the murder of
WPC Yvonne Fletcher in 1984. But the Americans wanted us and the
rest of Europe to go further still by imposing economic sanctions, in

particular ending purchases of Libyan oil, 75 per cent of which was
bought by the Europeans.
On Tuesday 7 January the United States unilaterally imposed
sanctions on Libya with little or no consultation and expected the rest
of us to follow. I was not prepared to go along with this. I made it
clear in public that I did not believe that economic sanctions against
Libya would work. The US State Department was highly displeased
and even suggested that Britain was the least helpful of their European
allies — something which was quite unjust since we were already
applying stiff measures against Libya as regards arms, credits and
immigration and had closed down the Libyan ‘People’s Bureau’. One
reason why the United States considered Britain particularly difficult
was because of my un-European habit of straight talking when I
disagreed. When I discussed how to deal with Libya with President
Mitterrand in Lille in mid-January he sounded a good deal more
hawkish than I was. No doubt the Americans were receiving a similar
impression.
In late January, February and March tension between the United
States and Libya rose as US naval forces started manoeuvres in an area
of the Gulf of Sirte which Libya, in violation of international law and
opinion, claimed as its own territorial waters. On Monday 24 March
US aircraft were attacked by Libyan missiles fired from the shore. US
forces struck back at the Libyan missile sites and sank a Libyan fast
patrol boat.
I had to consider what our reaction would be. I was conscious that
we had 5,000 British subjects in Libya, while the United States had
only 1,000. I was also aware of the possibility of Libyan action against
our base in Cyprus. But I told Cabinet that in spite of this we must
endorse the right of the United States to maintain freedom of
movement in international waters and air space and its right to selfdefence under the UN Charter.
Meanwhile, the Americans may have started to see who their true
friends were. I learned that the French were expressing reservations
about any policy of confrontation with Colonel Gaddafi, arguing that
any US military action would win Libya Arab support and urging the
need to avoid ‘provocation’.
Then in the early hours of Saturday 5 April a bomb exploded in a
discothèque frequented by US servicemen in West Berlin. Two people
— one a US soldier — were killed and some 200 others — including
60 Americans — were injured. US intelligence, confirmed by ours,
pointed to a Libyan involvement. For the Americans this was the final
straw.
Just before 11 p.m. on the night of Tuesday 8 April I received a
message from President Reagan. He requested our support for the use
of the American F1–11s and support aircraft based in Britain in strikes
against Libya, and he asked for an answer by noon the following day.

At this stage there was nothing to indicate the precise nature of US
objectives and targets. I immediately called in Geoffrey Howe and
George Younger to discuss what should be done. At 1 a.m. I sent an
interim reply to the President. Its main purpose was to ask him to
think further. I emphasized that my basic instinct was to support the
United States but I also expressed very considerable anxiety about
what was proposed. I wanted more information on the targets in
Libya. I was worried that US action might begin a cycle of revenge. I
was concerned that there must be the right public justification for the
action which was taken, otherwise we might just strengthen Gaddafi’s
standing. I was also worried about the implications for British hostages
in the Lebanon — and, as events were to turn out, rightly so.
Looking back, I think that this initial response was probably too
negative. Certainly the Americans thought so. But it had the practical
benefit of making them think through precisely what their objectives
were and how they were to justify them, which is certainly one service
to be expected of a friend. Two other considerations influenced me.
First, I felt that there was an inclination to precipitate action in the
United States, which was doubtless mirrored there by a perception of
lethargy in Europe. Second, even at this stage I knew that the political
cost to me of giving permission for the use of US bases by the United
States in their strikes against Libya would be high. The Government’s
fortunes were just recovering from the low point of Westland and BL:
but that recovery was fragile. I could not take this decision lightly.
Geoffrey, George, officials and I met the following morning at 7.45
at No. 10. A message had been received from the White House saying
that the final reply to the original request was not now required by
noon. I decided to use the time available by having lists of possible
Libyan targets drawn up which would be as narrow as possible. More
in hope than anticipation, a list of non-military actions which the US
might take was also drawn up. I held a further meeting in the early
afternoon, but there was little we could usefully do until I received the
President’s reply to my message. I waited with some anxiety
throughout the afternoon and evening.
Some time after midnight President Reagan’s response came through
on the hot-line. It was a powerful, detailed and not uncritical answer
to the points I had raised. President Reagan stressed that the action he
planned would not set off a new cycle of revenge: for the cycle of
violence began a long time ago, as the story of Gaddafi’s terrorist
actions demonstrated. He drew attention to what we knew from
intelligence about Libyan direction of terrorist violence. He argued
that it was the lack of a firm western response which had encouraged
this. He felt that the legal justification for such action was clear. The
President emphasized that the US action would be aimed at Gaddafi’s
primary headquarters and immediate security forces, rather than the
Libyan people or even troop concentrations of the regular armed
forces. The strikes would be at limited targets. I was particularly

impressed by the President’s sober assessment of the likely effect of
what was planned. He wrote:
I have no illusion that these actions will eliminate entirely the terrorist
threat. But it will show that officially sponsored terrorist actions by a
government — such as Libya has repeatedly perpetrated — will not be
without cost. The loss of such state sponsorship will inevitably weaken the
ability of terrorist organizations to carry out their criminal attacks even as
we work through diplomatic, political, and economic channels to alleviate
the more fundamental causes of such terrorism.

I read and reread the President’s message. He was clearly
determined to go ahead.
The more I considered the matter the clearer the justification for
America’s approach to Libya seemed. The phenomenon of the terrorist
state which projects violence against its enemies across the globe,
using surrogates wherever possible, is one which earlier generations
never confronted. The means required to crush this kind of threat to
world order and peace are bound to be different too. There was no
doubt of Gaddafi’s culpability. Nor when the most powerful country in
the free world decided to act against him must there be any doubt
where Britain stood. Whatever the cost to me, I knew that the cost to
Britain of not backing American action was unthinkable. If the United
States was abandoned by its closest ally the American people and their
Government would feel bitterly betrayed — and reasonably so. From
this point on, my efforts were directed not at trying to hold America
back but to giving her Britain’s full support, both as regards use of
bases and in justifying its action against what I knew would be a storm
of opposition in Britain and Europe. This did not mean, however, that
I would go along with every American suggestion. It remained vital
that the air strikes be limited to clearly defined targets and that the
action as a whole could be justified on grounds of self-defence.

The first task next day was to convince my colleagues of what
needed to be done. Geoffrey Howe was against the American action,
but once the decision had been made to support it he defended the
line staunchly in public. George Younger supported it from the first.
That afternoon I sent a further message to President Reagan. I
pledged ‘our unqualified support for action directed against specific
Libyan targets demonstrably involved in the conduct and support of
terrorist activities’. I pledged support for the use of US aircraft from
their bases in the UK, as long as that criterion was met. But I
questioned some of the proposed targets and warned that if there
ensued more wide-ranging action the Americans should recognize that
even those most keen to give them all possible support would then
find themselves in a difficult position.
It is all but impossible to keep anything secret in Washington, which
was now awash with rumours of US preparations for military action
against Libya. This did not make it any easier to maintain a discreet
silence about our own attitude. At one point on Friday it seemed that

the US was not intending to use the F1 — 11S based in Britain, which
would of course have substantially eased our predicament. But later in
the evening it appeared that they would indeed wish to do so. Later
still I received a message from President Reagan thanking me for our
offer of co-operation and confirming that the targets would be closely
defined under three categories: those which were directly terrorist
related; those having to do with command, control and logistics which
were indirectly related; and those relating to defence suppression —
that is radar and other equipment which would endanger the incoming
American aircraft.
On Saturday morning General Vernon Walters came to see me to
explain American intentions in more detail. I began by saying how
appalled I was that the gist of my exchanges with President Reagan
was by now openly reported in the US press. This meant, of course,
that the propaganda battle was even more important. I eagerly
welcomed General Walters’s offer to show us in advance the statement
from the President which would announce and explain the Libyan
raid. He and I also discussed how much intelligence information could
be used in public to justify the action. I was always more reluctant to
reveal intelligence than were the Americans. But on this occasion it
was obviously vital to do so if the general public were to be convinced
of the truth of the allegations we were making against Gaddafi. In fact,
although I do not believe that anyone’s life was endangered as a result
of these revelations, it is certainly true that a fair amount of
intelligence dried up. I also discussed with General Walters the
President’s latest list of targets which I found reasonably reassuring. I
suspect that the General knew precisely which targets the US would
hit by the time he came to see me. If so, it was very wise of him not to
say what they were. I hoped that he would be even more discreet in
the rest of his trip to Paris, Rome, Bonn and Madrid where he was to
explain the intelligence on which the US was acting and ask for
European support.
Now that America was actually asking the Europeans for assistance
which involved a political price they showed themselves in a less than
glorious light. Chancellor Kohl apparently told the Americans that the
US should not expect the wholehearted support of its European allies
and said that everything would turn on whether the action succeeded.
The French who just recently had indulged in at least private sabre
rattling refused to allow the F1 — 11s to cross French airspace. The
Spanish said that the American aircraft could fly over Spain, but only
if it was done in a way which would not be noticed. Since this
condition could not be met, they had to fly through the Straits of
Gibraltar.
Speculation was now rife. We could not confirm or deny our
exchanges with the Americans. The Labour and Liberal Parties insisted
that we should rule out the use of American bases in the UK for the
action which everyone now seemed to expect. It was important to

ensure that senior members of the Cabinet backed my decision. At
midday on Monday (14 April) I told the Cabinet’s Overseas and
Defence Committee what had been happening in recent days. I said
that it was clear that the US was justified in acting in self-defence
under Article 51 of the UN Treaty. Finally, I stressed that we had to
stand by the Americans as they had stood by us over the Falklands.
That afternoon it was confirmed by telephone from Washington that
American aircraft would soon take off from their British bases. I
received the news shortly before attending a long-standing
engagement at the Economist: this was a reception to celebrate either
the great Victorian constitutionalist Walter Bagehot or Norman St
John Stevas, his contemporary editor, depending on your point of
view. As I entered the Economist building off St James’s, Andrew
Knight, the magazine’s editor, remarked with some concern how pale I
looked. Since my complexion is never ruddy, I must have appeared
like Banquo’s ghost. But I wondered how Andrew Knight would have
looked if he knew about those American F1 — 11s heading secretly
and circuitously towards Tripoli. Nevertheless I praised Bagehot,
kissed Norman and returned to No. 10.
Late that night I received a message from President Reagan saying
that the US aircraft would shortly strike at five named terroristassociated targets in Libya. The President confirmed that the text of
his televised statement to the American people took into account our
advice to stress the element of self-defence to get the legal position
right. My own statement to the House of Commons on the raid for the
following day was already being drafted.
The American attack was, as we had foreseen, carried out
principally by sixteen F1-11s based in the UK, though a number of other
aircraft were also used. The attack lasted forty minutes. Libyan
missiles and guns were fired but their air defence radars were
successfully jammed. The raid was undoubtedly a success, though
sadly there were civilian casualties and one aircraft was lost.
Television reports, however, concentrated all but exclusively not on
the strategic importance of the targets but on weeping mothers and
children.
The initial impact on public opinion in Britain, as elsewhere, was
even worse than I had feared. Public sympathy for Libyan civilians
was mixed with fear of terrorist retaliation by Libya. Conservative
Central Office received large numbers of telephoned protests, as did
the No. 10 switchboard. Worries were expressed about the fate of
British nationals there and the potential for hostage taking. Opposition
critics, Conservative back-benchers and Tory newspapers alike were
bitterly critical of the fact that I had given permission for the use of
the bases. I was depicted as cringing towards the US but callous
towards their victims. I reported fully on what had happened to the
Cabinet, some of whose members I subsequently learnt thought that
they ought to have known about the raid beforehand. Later that

afternoon I made my statement to a largely sceptical or hostile House
of Commons. President Reagan telephoned me afterwards to fill me in
on what had been happening and to wish me well in fighting off the
criticism he knew I faced. He said that when in his speech on
television the previous night he had referred to the co-operation of
European allies, he had had only one country in mind — the United
Kingdom.
I was to speak in the emergency debate on the Libyan raid in the
House on Wednesday afternoon. It was intellectually and technically
the most difficult speech to prepare because it depended heavily on
describing the intelligence on Libya’s terrorist activities and we had to
marshal the arguments for self-defence in such circumstances. Every
word of the speech had to be checked by the relevant intelligence
services to see that it was accurate and that it did not place sources at
risk. The debate was rank with anti-American prejudice. Neil Kinnock
misquoted President Reagan’s televised broadcast; but he did so once
too often. I had heard him do this earlier in the day and I had the full
text of what the President had actually said given to Cranley Onslow,
the Chairman of the ‘22 Committee Executive. Mr Kinnock said:
The purpose of the bombing raid on Tripoli and Benghazi on Monday night
was said by President Reagan to be to ‘bring down the curtain on Gaddafi’s
reign of terror’. I do not believe that anyone can seriously believe that that
objective has been or will be achieved by bombing.

Cranley Onslow interrupted to point out that the President had said
precisely the opposite:
I have no illusion [my italics] that tonight’s action will bring down the curtain
on Gaddafi’s regime, but this mission, violent as it was, can bring closer a
safer and more secure world for decent men and women.

As the Victorians used to say: ‘collapse of stout party’.
My speech steadied the Party and the debate was a success. But
there was still a large measure of incomprehension even among our
supporters. I went that Friday to Cranley Onslow’s constituency. I felt
that people were looking at me strangely, as if I had done something
terrible, which given the sensational and biased media coverage you
could understand. When I explained to party workers at a reception
that our action had been taken to protect the victims of future
terrorism, they understood: but the accusation of heartlessness stuck
— and it hurt. Yet the Libyan raid was also a turning point; and three
direct benefits flowed from it.
First, it turned out to be a more decisive blow against Libyansponsored terrorism than I could ever have imagined. We are all too
inclined to forget that tyrants rule by force and fear and are kept in
check in the same way. There were revenge killings of British hostages
organized by Libya, which I bitterly regretted. But the much vaunted
Libyan counter-attack did not and could not take place. Gaddafi had
not been destroyed but he had been humbled. There was a marked

decline in Libyan-sponsored terrorism in succeeding years.
Second, there was a wave of gratitude from the United States for
what we had done which is still serving this country well. The Wall
Street Journal flatteringly described me as ‘magnificent’. Senators
wrote to thank me. In marked contrast to feelings in Britain, our
Washington embassy’s switchboard was jammed with congratulatory
telephone calls. It was made quite clear by the Administration that
Britain’s voice would be accorded special weight in arms control
negotiations. The Extradition Treaty, which we regarded as vital in
bringing IRA terrorists back from America, was to receive stronger
Administration support against filibustering opposition. The fact that
so few had stuck by America in her time of trial strengthened the
‘special relationship’, which will always be special because of the
cultural and historical links between our two countries, but which had
a particular closeness for as long as President Reagan was in the White
House.
The third benefit, oddly enough, was domestic, though it was by no
means immediate. However unpopular, no one could doubt that our
action had been strong and decisive. I had set my course and stuck to
it. Ministers and disaffected MPs might mutter; but they were
muttering now about leadership they did not like, rather than a failure
of leadership. I had faced down the anti-Americanism which
threatened to poison our relations with our closest and most powerful
ally, and not only survived but emerged with greater authority and
influence on the world stage: this the critics could not ignore. And
such are the paradoxes of politics that within the year this wave of
anti-Americanism had come to the Government’s aid. Labour was
emboldened foolishly to stress an anti-American defence policy —
which provoked strong reactions from Cap Weinberger and Richard
Perle. When the British people were told that ‘if you want us to go, we
will go’ they woke up to reality. Labour’s anti-Americanism, in vogue
the year before, steadily became more of an albatross and when the
election came it helped to sink them.
As the spring of 1986 moved into summer the political climate
began slowly, but unmistakeably, to improve.
Three months’ redundancy pay had been available to ministers in the Lords since
1984, and we introduced legislation to extend the scheme to the Commons in July
1990. Due to lack of time the scheme was only enacted in February 1991.
*

*
*

The principal sub-committee of ‘E’, the economic committee of the Cabinet.
See Chapters 4 and 23.

John Redwood had arrived in 1983 to be the extremely effective head of the Policy
Unit. He and Peter Warry kept a shrewd and sceptical eye on BL’s finances, briefing me
regularly.
*

CHAPTER XVI

Men to Do Business With
East-West relations during the second term — 1983–1987

REASSESSING THE SOVIET UNION
As 1983 drew on, the Soviets must have begun to realize that their
game of manipulation and intimidation would soon be up. European
governments were not prepared to fall into the trap opened by the
Soviet proposal of a ‘nuclear-free zone’ for Europe. Preparations for
the deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles went ahead. In March
President Reagan announced American plans for a Strategic Defence
Initiative (SDI) whose technological and financial implications for the
USSR were devastating. Then, at the beginning of September the
Soviets shot down a South Korean civilian airliner, killing 269
passengers. Not just the callousness but the incompetence of the Soviet
regime, which could not even bring itself to apologize, was exposed.
The foolish talk, based on a combination of western wishful thinking
and Soviet disinformation, about the cosmopolitan, open-minded,
cultured Mr Andropov as a Soviet leader who would make the world a
safer place was silenced. Perhaps for the first time since the Second
World War, the Soviet Union started to be described, even in liberal
western circles, as sick and on the defensive.
There was a new chill in East-West relations. We had entered a
dangerous phase. Both Ronald Reagan and I were aware of it. We
knew that the strategy of matching the Soviets in military strength and
beating them on the battlefield of ideas was succeeding and that it
must go on. But we had to win the Cold War without running
unnecessary risks in the meantime.
The Cold War itself had never really ended, at least from the Soviet
side: there were merely variations of chill. At times, as in Korea and
Vietnam, it had been far from cold. But it was always, as I never
forgot, a conflict of one system against another. In this sense, the
analysis of the communist ideologues was right: ultimately, our two
opposing systems were incompatible — though, because both sides
possessed the means of nuclear destruction, we had to make the
adjustments and compromises required to live together. What we in
the West had to do now was to learn as much as we could about the
people and the system which confronted us and then to have as much
contact with those living under that system as was compatible with
our continued security. In a cold as in a hot war it pays to know the
enemy — not least because at some time in the future you may have
the opportunity to turn him into a friend.

Such was the thinking which lay behind my decision to arrange a
seminar at Chequers on Thursday 8 September 1983 to pick the brains
of experts on the Soviet Union. The difficulty of tapping into outside
thinking even in our own open democratic system of government
shows just why closed totalitarian systems are so sluggish and
mediocre. I had been used to wide-ranging seminars from our days in
Opposition and had always found them stimulating and educative. But
instead of the best minds on the Soviet system I now found myself
presented with a list of the best minds in the Foreign Office, which
was not quite the same thing. I minuted on the original list of
suggested participants:
This is NOT the way I want it. I am not interested in gathering in every
junior minister, nor everyone who has ever dealt with the subject at the FO.
The FO must do their preparation before. I want also some people who have
really studied Russia — the Russian mind — and who have had some
experience of living there. More than half the people on the list know less
than I do.

Back to the drawing board.
In fact, by the time the seminar went ahead I felt that we did have
the right people and some first-class papers. The latter covered almost
all of the factors we would have to take into account in the years
ahead in dealing with the Soviets and their system. We discussed the
Soviet economy, its technological inertia and the consequences of that,
the impact of religious issues, Soviet military doctrine and expenditure
on defence, and the benefits and costs to the Soviet Union of their
control over eastern Europe. The one issue which, in retrospect, we
underestimated — though it figured briefly — was the nationality
question, failure to solve which would ultimately lead to the break-up
of the Soviet Union itself. Perhaps for me the most useful paper was
one which described and analysed the power structure of the Soviet
state, and which put flesh on the bones of what I had already learnt in
Opposition from Robert Conquest.
Of course, the purpose of this seminar was not ultimately academic:
it was to provide me with the information on which to shape policy
towards the Soviet Union and the eastern bloc in the months and years
ahead. There were always — right up to the last days of the Soviet
Union — two opposite outlooks among the Sovietologists.
At the risk of over-simplification, these were as follows. On the one
hand, there were those who played down the differences between the
western and Soviet systems and who were generally drawn from
political analysis and systems analysis. They were the people who
appeared night after night on our television screens analysing the
Soviet Union in terms borrowed from liberal democracies. These were
the optimists, in search of light at the end of even the longest tunnel,
confident that somehow, somewhere, within the Soviet totalitarian
system rationality and compromise were about to break out. I
remember a remark of Bob Conquest’s that the trouble with systems

analysis is that if you analyse the systems of a horse and a tiger, you
find them pretty much the same: but it would be a great mistake to
treat a tiger like a horse. On the other hand, there were those —
mainly the historians — who grasped that totalitarian systems are
different in kind, not just degree, from liberal democracies and that
approaches relevant to the one are irrelevant to the other. These
analysts argued that a totalitarian system generates a different kind of
political leader from a democratic one and that the ability of any one
individual to change that system is almost negligible.
My own view was much closer to the second than to the first of
these analyses, but with one very important difference. I always
believed that our western system would ultimately triumph, if we did
not throw our advantages away, because it rested on the unique,
almost limitless, creativity and vitality of individuals. Even a system
like that of the Soviets, which set out to crush the individual, could
never totally succeed in doing so, as was shown by the Solzhenitsyns,
Sakharovs, Bukovskys, Ratushinskayas and thousands of other
dissidents and refuseniks. This also implied that at some time the right
individual could challenge even the system which he had used to
attain power. For this reason, unlike many who otherwise shared my
approach to the Soviet Union, I was convinced that we must seek out
the most likely person in the rising generation of Soviet leaders and
then cultivate and sustain him, while recognizing the clear limits of
our power to do so. That is why those who subsequently considered
that I was led astray from my original approach to the Soviet Union
because I was dazzled by Mr Gorbachev were wrong. I spotted him
because I was searching for someone like him. And I was confident
that such a person could exist, even within that totalitarian structure,
because I believed that the spirit of the individual could never
ultimately be crushed in the Kremlin any more than in the Gulag.
At the time of my Chequers seminar, although as I have explained
East-West relations were worsening — and would become worse still
when the Soviets pulled out of arms control talks in Geneva in
response to the stationing of Cruise and Pershing missiles — it did
seem that there would soon be important changes in the Soviet
leadership. Mr Andropov, though he was no liberal, did undoubtedly
want to revive the Soviet economy, which was in fact in a far worse
state than any of us realized at the time. In order to do this he wanted
to cut back bureaucracy and improve efficiency. Although he had
inherited a top leadership which he could not instantly change, the
high average age of the Politburo would present him with the
opportunity of filling vacancies with those amenable to his objectives.
There were already doubts about Andropov’s health. If he lived for just
a few more years, however, it seemed likely that the leadership would
pass to a new generation. The two main contenders appeared to be
Grigory Romanov and Mikhail Gorbachev. I asked for all the
information we had about these two. It was not very much and a good

deal was vague and anecdotal. It was soon obvious to me, however,
that — attractive as was the idea of seeing a Romanov back in the
Kremlin — there would probably be other unpleasant consequences.
Romanov as First Secretary of the Communist Party in Leningrad had
won a reputation for efficiency but also as a hardline Marxist which,
like many of the sort, he combined with an extravagant lifestyle. And I
confess that when I read about those priceless crystal glasses from the
Hermitage being smashed at the celebration of his daughter’s wedding
some of the attraction of the name was lost as well.
Of Mr Gorbachev what little we knew seemed modestly
encouraging. He was clearly the best educated member of the
Politburo, not that anybody would have described this group of elderly
soldiers and bureaucrats as intellectuals. He had acquired a reputation
for being open-minded; but of course this might be just a matter of
style. He had risen steadily through the Party under Khrushchev,
Brezhnev and now Andropov, of whom he was clearly a special proté
gé; but that might well be a sign of conformity rather than talent.
Nevertheless, I heard favourable reports of him from Pierre Trudeau in
Canada later that month. I began to take special notice when his name
was mentioned in reports on the Soviet Union.
VISIT TO HUNGARY
For the moment, however, relations with the Soviets were so bad that
direct contact with them was almost impossible. It seemed to me that
it was through eastern Europe that we would have to work. The
Deputy Prime Minister of Hungary, Mr Marjai, had come to see me in
March, before the general election, and had renewed an invitation
from his Government for me to visit Hungary. I had been fascinated by
what he told me about the Hungarian ‘economic experiment’. At one
point Mr Marjai, having noted the importance of profits and
incentives, declared that it was not for the government to hand out
money because the government did not have money. I commented
that these remarks could have been made in one of my own speeches.
Hungary was the choice for my first visit as Prime Minister to a
Warsaw Pact country for several reasons. The Hungarians had gone
furthest along the path of economic reform, although they were
anxious to describe it as anything but capitalism. A certain amount of
liberalization had occurred, though outright dissent was punished. The
strategy of Já nos Ká dá r, officially First Secretary of the Hungarian
Communist Party but in fact unchallenged leader, was summed up in
the telling if hardly original slogan, ‘he who is not against us is with
us.’ He used economic links with the West to provide his people with a
tolerable standard of living while constantly asserting Hungary’s
loyalty to the Warsaw Pact, socialism and the Soviet Union: a
necessary consideration, given that some 60,000 Soviet troops had
been ‘temporarily’ stationed in Hungary since 1948. By this time Mr

Kâdâr seemed to be regarded with some respect, perhaps even
affection, by many Hungarians because he was credited with avoiding
a repetition of the events of 1956, while allowing a gradual process of
reform to continue. Although he himself had been tortured by his
comrades, his own past included the incidents of villainy which
marked the careers of all that generation of old communist leaders: he
had been responsible for the torture and trial of Cardinal Mindszenty,
the execution of his friend, Foreign minister Rajk, and the betrayal of
the Revolution of 1956. However, he denied to me personally that he
had had any responsibility for the execution of Imre Nagy, the
reformist communist leader; indeed he said he had obtained an
undertaking from the Soviets that Nagy would be allowed to live. In
any case, the fact that Kâdâr had been in power for so long meant that
he had come to know the Soviets and their thinking better than any
other eastern European leader. In particular, he knew Mr Andropov,
who had been the Soviet Ambassador in Budapest at the time of the
1956 uprising, and, we believed, remained close to him. I hoped that
he would report back to the Soviet leader what I had to say.
I stepped off the plane at 10 o’clock on the night of Thursday 2
February 1984 to be met by the Hungarian Prime Minister, Mr Lâ zâ r,
and then walked across the thick snow to inspect a floodlit Guard of
Honour. My first official engagement the next morning was a private
discussion with Mr Lâ zâ r, a self-effacing functionary who gave every
sign of loyalty to the communist system. But what he had to say
showed the roots of that loyalty. He warned me that the worst possible
thing I could do on my visit was to cast doubt on Hungary’s remaining
part of the socialist bloc. The Hungarians had been concerned at what
Vice-President George Bush had said to this effect in Vienna after
making a successful visit to the country. I realized that formal
adherence to the Soviet system was the price of the limited reforms
they had been able to make. I immediately said that I understood and I
was careful then and later to keep my word.
Later that morning I saw Mr Kâ dâ r. He had only four more years
left in power. But he was still vigorous and very much in charge. He
was a square-faced, large-boned, healthy complexioned man with an
air of easy authority and an apparently reasonable frame of mind in
discussion. He did not rely, as so many other communist leaders did,
on serried ranks of advisers and we were accompanied only by
interpreters.
The main message I tried to get across was that the West and
President Reagan personally were genuinely seeking disarmament.
What we wanted was to preserve our own security, but at a lower
level of weaponry, particularly nuclear weaponry. I told Mr Kâdâr that
I knew from President Reagan, who was a close friend, just how
personally hurt he had been by an earlier response to an attempt to get
a better understanding with the Soviet Union. I recalled the tone in
which President Reagan had spoken, when the two of us were walking

in the garden of the United States Embassy in Paris, about a personal
letter he had written in his own hand to President Brezhnev telling
him of America’s desire for peace. He awaited the reply eagerly. It
took a long time to come. And when it did, it consisted of just the
standard, official typed letter, short and dismissive. Since then, I
added, President Reagan had indeed been increasing the military
strength of the United States but he wanted relations between NATO
and the Warsaw Pact improved.
I went on to try to gain a clearer picture from Mr Kâdâr of the
situation in the USSR. He told me about the personalities of the Soviet
leaders he had known: as he put it ‘the Russians are individuals too’.
Khrushchev was impulsive. Mr Kádár had told him that he was like an
old Bolshevik — instead of saying ‘Good Morning’, he tended to punch
you in the stomach. Brezhnev he described as very emotional.
Andropov was different again. He described him as very tough and
calculating, but someone who was capable of listening. He confirmed
that Andropov was ill, but said that he was mentally intact and never
stopped working. He also told me that his condition was improving
but that the Hungarians were crossing their fingers for him. He added
that the Soviet leadership was becoming stronger and younger people
were entering it, that they wanted peace and were prepared to have
talks about it. Of course, this picture of life in the Kremlin could
hardly be taken at face value, given Mr Ká dá r’s long association with
Mr Andropov. And given that Andropov died six days later, what he
told me about the latter’s health was either wildly optimistic or a
diplomatic lie. But his insights were interesting nonetheless.
So too was my first experience of what life in a communist country
was like for ordinary people. On Saturday morning I visited Budapest’s
large central covered market, talked to stall holders and shoppers and
bought honey, pimentos and spices. Huge friendly crowds gathered, in
spite of the intense cold. The market was better stocked than I
imagined it would be. But what remains in my mind even to this day
was the warm, even passionate, welcome from the crowd of shoppers.
It was not just that I was a western head of government that evoked
this, but my reputation as a strong anti-communist political leader — a
reputation further burnished internationally by the Falklands War two
years before and even by the Soviet attacks on me as the Iron Lady. I
responded warmly to the crowd and, on my return to London, found
that several journalists were reporting my discovery that ‘communists
were human beings too.’ What I had in fact discovered — or rather
had confirmed — was that human beings in communist countries were
not in fact communists at all but retained a thirst for liberty.
I was also struck by the people’s pride in the old Hungary — which
has since become the basis for the new post-communist one. At
Szentendre I visited the local museum and art gallery which had a
valuable collection of porcelain. I was shown round by a distinguished
elderly curator, wearing well-cut but worn clothes, and immaculately

polished but creased shoes. He had that indefinable air of someone
who has known better days, as indeed he had. He was an aristocrat
who had lost his property, but at the time of the communist
revolution, rather than go into exile, he had remained to pass on his
extraordinary knowledge of Hungarian history and culture to a new
generation, who might otherwise forget it. Both from what he told me
then of his country’s past and what I had noticed earlier in my
discussions with Mr Ká dá r, all Hungarians — even the communist
rulers — had a strong sense of their country’s identity.
The one surprise — and disappointment — of my visit was how far
even Hungary was from a free economy. There were some small
businesses, but they were not allowed to grow beyond a certain size.
The main emphasis of Hungary’s economic reforms was not on
increasing private ownership of land or investment but rather on
private or co-operative use of state-owned facilities. I visited a housing
project at Szentendre in which the British firm, Wimpey, was involved.
I found, on asking the people that I met there, that though they could
buy their own flats they could not sell them freely on the market but
only back to the state — more or less the same policy, it must be said,
that the Labour Party in Britain had adopted towards the sale of
council houses.
I reported my impressions in a message to President Reagan:
[The Hungarian] economic experiment is conducted within very strict limits:
the single political party, the controlled press, the sham Parliament, the state
ownership of all but the smallest economic units, but above all the close
alliance with Moscow. Kádár and Lázár made it perfectly plain that these
things cannot change…. I am becoming convinced that we are more likely to
make progress on the detailed arms control negotiations if we can first
establish a broader basis of understanding between East and West. But I am
under no illusions that it will be very hard to achieve that. It will be a slow
and gradual process, during which we must never lower our guard. However,
I believe that the effort has to be made.

In retrospect, my Hungarian visit was the first foray in what became
a distinctive British diplomacy towards the captive nations of eastern
Europe. The first step was to open greater economic and commercial
links with the existing regimes, making them less dependent upon the
closed COMECON system. Later we were to put more stress on human
rights. And, finally, as the Soviet control of eastern Europe began to
decay, we made internal political reforms the condition of western
help. My visit to Hungary which began this successful diplomatic
strategy had turned out to be altogether more significant than I could
have imagined.
MOSCOW: ANDROPOV’S FUNERAL
Just a few days after my return from Hungary Mr Andropov was dead.
Nevertheless the funeral, to which I decided to go, would give me the

opportunity to meet the man who to our surprise emerged as the new
Soviet leader, Mr Konstantin Chernenko. We had thought that Mr
Chernenko was too old, too ill and too closely connected with Mr
Brezhnev and his era to succeed to the leadership — and as events
turned out we were more astute than his colleagues in the Politburo.
But at least western commentators were unlikely to portray this ageing
time-server as heralding an overnight transformation of totalitarianism
into liberal democracy.
My party landed at Moscow Airport at 9.30 p.m. on Monday 13
February. It was bitterly cold and as I trod gingerly around the ice
patches I wished that I was wearing a thick Russian fur coat. I spent
the night at our embassy — a magnificent house, facing the Kremlin
across the Moskva river, which was constructed at the end of the last
century for a Ukrainian sugar magnate. (Later, when we would
otherwise have had to give it up at the end of the lease, I did a deal
with Mr Gorbachev for us to keep our splendid building in exchange
for the Soviets keeping their current embassy in Britain when that
lease expired. One of the few points on which the Foreign Office and I
agreed was the need for British embassies to be architecturally
imposing and provided with fine pictures and furniture.)
The day of the funeral was bright, clear and if anything even colder
than when I arrived. At these occasions visiting dignitaries did not
have seats: we had to stand for several hours in a specially reserved
enclosure. Later I met the new Soviet leader for a short private
meeting at which he read rapidly, stumbling over his words from time
to time, from a prepared text. He was accompanied by the Soviet
Foreign minister, Mr Gromyko. It was a formal affair, covering all the
old ground of disarmament issues. I was unimpressed.
With long hours of standing I was glad that Robin Butler had
persuaded me that I should wear fur-lined boots, rather than my usual
high heels. They had been expensive. But when I met Mr Chernenko
the thought crossed my mind that they would probably come in useful
again soon.
VISIT OF THE GORBACHEVS TO BRITAIN
I now had to consider the next step in my strategy of gaining closer
relations — on the right terms — with the Soviet Union. Clearly, there
must be more personal contact with the Soviet leaders. Geoffrey Howe
wanted us to extend an invitation to Mr Chernenko to come to Britain
but I said that it was too early to do this. We needed to see more about
where the new Soviet leader was heading first. But I was keen to invite
others and accordingly invitations went to several senior Soviet
figures, including Mr Gorbachev. It quickly appeared that Mr
Gorbachev was indeed keen to come on what would be his first visit to
a European capitalist country and wanted to do so soon. By now we
had learned more about his background and that of his wife, Raisa,

who, unlike the wives of other leading Soviet politicians, was often
seen in public and was an articulate, highly educated and attractive
woman. I decided that the Gorbachevs should both come to Chequers,
which has just the right country house atmosphere conducive to good
conversation. I regarded the meeting as potentially of great
significance. Indeed, before their arrival I held a further seminar with
Soviet experts to cover the issues and work out the approach I would
take.
The Gorbachevs drove down from London on the morning of Sunday
16 December, arriving in time for lunch. Over drinks in the Great Hall
Mr Gorbachev told me how interested he had been to see the farm
land on the way to Chequers and we compared notes about our
countries’ different agricultural systems. This had been his
responsibility for a number of years and he had apparently achieved
some modest progress in reforming the collective farms, but up to 30
per cent of the crops were lost because of failures of distribution.
Raisa Gorbachev too was making her first visit to western Europe
and she knew only a little English — as far as I could tell her husband
knew none; but she was dressed in a smart western style outfit, a welltailored grey suit with a white stripe — just the sort I could have worn
myself, I thought. She had a philosophy degree and had indeed been
an academic. Our advice at this time was that Mrs Gorbachev was a
committed, hardline Marxist; her obvious interest in Hobbes’s
Leviathan, which she took down from the shelf in the library, might
possibly have confirmed that. But I later learned from her — after I
had left office — that her grandfather had been one of those millions
of kulaks killed during the forced collectivization of agriculture under
Stalin. Her family had no good reason for illusions about communism.
We went into lunch — I was accompanied by a rather large team of
Willie Whitelaw, Geoffrey Howe, Michael Heseltine, Michael Jopling,
Malcolm Rifkind (Minister of State at the Foreign Office), Paul
Channon and advisers; he and Raisa by Mr Zamyatin, the Soviet
Ambassador, and the quietly impressive Mr Alexander Yakovlev, the
adviser who was to play a large part in the reforms of the ‘Gorbachev
years’. It was not long before the conversation turned from trivialities
— for which neither Mr Gorbachev nor I had any taste — to a
vigorous two-way debate. In a sense, the argument has continued ever
since and is taken up whenever we meet; and as it goes to the heart of
what politics is really about, I never tire of it.
He told me about the economic programmes of the Soviet system,
the switch from big industrial plant to smaller projects and
‘businesses’, the ambitious irrigation schemes and the way in which
the industrial planners adapted industrial capacity to the labour force
to avoid unemployment. I asked whether this might not all be easier if
reform were attempted on a free enterprise basis, with the provision of
incentives and a free hand for local enterprises to run their own show,
rather than everything being directed from the centre. Mr Gorbachev

denied indignantly that everything in the USSR was run from the
centre. I took another tack. I explained that in the western system
everyone — including the poorest — ultimately received more than
they would from a system which depended simply on redistribution.
Indeed, in Britain we were attempting to cut taxes in order to increase
incentives so that we could create wealth, competing in world
markets. I said I had no wish to have the power to direct everyone
where he should work and what he or she should receive.
Mr Gorbachev, however, insisted on the superiority of the Soviet
system. Not only did it produce higher growth rates, but if I came to
the USSR I would see how the Soviet people lived — ‘joyfully’. If this
were so, I countered, why did the Soviet authorities not allow people
to leave the country as easily as they could leave Britain?
In particular, I criticized the constraints placed on Jewish
emigration to Israel. He claimed that 80 per cent of those who had
expressed the wish to leave the Soviet Union had been able to do so. I
said that this was not my information. But he repeated the Soviet line,
which I did not believe either, that those forbidden to leave had been
working in areas relating to national security. I knew there was no
purpose in persisting now; but the point had been registered. The
Soviets had to know that every time we met their treatment of the
refuseniks would be thrown back at them.
We now left the dining-room and had coffee in the main sittingroom. All of my team except Geoffrey Howe, my private secretary
Charles Powell, and the interpreter left. Denis showed Mrs Gorbachev
around the house.
If at this stage I had paid attention only to the content of Mr
Gorbachev’s remarks — largely the standard Marxist line — I would
have to conclude that he was cast in the usual communist mould. But
his personality could not have been more different from the wooden
ventriloquism of the average Soviet apparatchik. He smiled, laughed,
used his hands for emphasis, modulated his voice, followed an
argument through and was a sharp debater. He was self-confident and
though he larded his remarks with respectful references to Mr
Chernenko, from whom he brought a not very illuminating written
message, he did not seem in the least uneasy about entering into
controversial areas of high politics. This was even more so in the hours
of discussion which followed. He never read from a prepared brief, but
referred to a small notebook of manuscript jottings. Only on matters of
pronunciation of foreign names did he refer to his colleagues for
advice. His line was no different from what I would have expected. His
style was. As the day wore on I came to understand that it was the
style far more than the Marxist rhetoric which expressed the substance
of the personality beneath. I found myself liking him.
The most practical piece of business I had to discuss on this occasion
was arms control. It was an important moment. Secretary of State
Shultz and Foreign minister Gromyko were due to meet early in the

New Year in Geneva to see whether the stalled arms talks could be
revived. I had found in talking to the Hungarians that the best basis on
which to discuss arms control in a relatively serene atmosphere was to
state that our two opposing systems must live side by side, with less
hostility and lower levels of armaments. I did the same again now.
I added that as perhaps the last generation of politicians that
remembered the Second World War, we had a bounden duty to ensure
that no such conflict would occur again. On this basis our detailed
discussions began: two things quickly became clear. The first was just
how well briefed Mr Gorbachev was about the West. He commented
on my speeches, which he had clearly read. He quoted Lord
Palmerston’s dictum that Britain had no eternal friends or enemies but
only eternal interests. He had been closely following leaked
conversations from the American National Security Council, which had
appeared in the American press, to the effect that the US had an
interest in not allowing the Soviet economy to emerge from
stagnation.
At one point, with a touch of theatre, he pulled out a full-page
diagram from the New York Times, illustrating the explosive power of
the weapons of the two superpowers compared with the explosive
power available in the Second World War. He was well versed in the
fashionable arguments then raging about the prospect of a ‘nuclear
winter’ resulting from a nuclear exchange. I was not much moved by
all this. I said that what interested me more than the concept of the
nuclear winter was avoiding the incineration, death and destruction
which would precede it. But the purpose of nuclear weapons was, in
any case, to deter war not to wage it. They had given us a greater
degree of protection from war than we had ever known before. Yet
this could — and must — now be achieved at a lower level of
weaponry. Mr Gorbachev argued that if both sides continued to pile up
weapons this could lead to accidents or unforeseen circumstances and
with the present generation of weapons the time for decision-making
could be counted in minutes. As he put it, in one of the more obscure
Russian proverbs, ‘once a year even an unloaded gun can go off.’
The other point which emerged was the Soviets’ distrust of the
Reagan Administration’s intentions in general and of their plans for a
Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI) in particular. I emphasized on more
than one occasion that President Reagan could be trusted and that the
last thing he would ever want was war. I spoke, as I had in Hungary,
about the desire for peace which lay behind his earlier letter to
President Brezhnev. In this he was continuing something which was
characteristic of America. The United States had never shown any
desire for world domination. When, just after the war, they had
enjoyed a monopoly of nuclear weapons, they had never used that
monopoly to threaten others. The Americans had always used their
power sparingly and shown outstanding generosity to other countries.
I made it clear that, while I was strongly in favour of the Americans

going ahead with SDI, I did not share President Reagan’s view that it
was a means of ridding the world entirely of nuclear weapons. This
seemed to me an unattainable dream — you could not disinvent the
knowledge of how to make such weapons. But I also reminded Mr
Gorbachev that the Soviet Union had been the first country to develop
an anti-satellite (ASAT) capability. It was clearly not feasible to think
in terms of stopping research into space-based systems. The critical
stage came when the results of that research were translated into the
production of weapons on a large scale.
As the discussion wore on it was clear that the Soviets were indeed
very concerned about SDI. They wanted it stopped at almost any price.
I knew that to some degree I was being used as a stalking horse for
President Reagan. I was also aware that I was dealing with a wily
opponent who would ruthlessly exploit any divisions between me and
the Americans. So I bluntly stated — and then repeated at the end of
the meeting — that he should understand that there was no question
of dividing us: we would remain staunch allies of the United States.
My frankness on this was particularly important because of my equal
frankness about what I saw as the President’s unrealistic dream of a
nuclear-free world.
The talks were due to end at 4.30 p.m. to allow Mr Gorbachev to be
back for an early evening reception at the Soviet Embassy, but he said
that he wanted to continue. It was 5.50 p.m. when he left, having
introduced me to another pearl of Russian popular wisdom to the
effect that, ‘Mountain folk cannot live without guests any more than
they can live without air. But if the guests stay longer than necessary,
they choke.’ As he took his leave, I hoped that I had been talking to
the next Soviet leader. For, as I subsequently told the press, this was a
man with whom I could do business.
SDI
President Reagan’s Strategic Defence Initiative, about which the
Soviets and Mr Gorbachev were already so alarmed, was to prove
central to the West’s victory in the Cold War. Although, as I have
noted, I differed sharply from the President’s view that SDI was a
major step towards a nuclear weapon-free world — something which I
believed was neither attainable nor even desirable — I had no doubt
about the Tightness of his commitment to press ahead with the
programme. Looking back, it is now clear to me that Ronald Reagan’s
original decision on SDI was the single most important of his
presidency.
In Britain, I kept tight personal control over decisions relating to SDI
and our reactions to it. I knew that irreparable harm could have been
done to our relations with the United States had the wrong line or
even tone been adopted. I was also passionately interested in the
technical developments and strategic implications. This was one of

those areas in which only a firm grasp of the scientific concepts
involved allows the right policy decisions to be made. Laid back
generalists from the Foreign Office — let alone the ministerial
muddlers in charge of them — could not be relied upon. By contrast, I
was in my element.
When I was Leader of the Opposition I had had several briefings
from military experts about the technical possibilities of SDI and
indeed about the advances already made by the Soviet Union in laser
and anti-satellite technology. These left me fearful that they were
already moving ahead of us. I collected and read articles from Aviation
Weekly and the scientific press. Consequently, when I began to read
reports of the new Reagan Administration’s thinking in this area I
immediately understood that we too needed access to the best expert
advice in order to assess the potentially revolutionary implications.
Neither the Foreign Office nor the Ministry of Defence took SDI
sufficiently seriously. Time and again I had to press for papers which
had been promised and these, when they came, consistently
underrated the technical possibilities opened up by the research and
the American Administration’s determination to press ahead with it. In
fact, the only time I found much enthusiasm was when there appeared
to be possibilities — which, by contrast, the MoD significantly
exaggerated — for British firms to win large contracts for the research.
In formulating our approach to SDI, there were four distinct
elements which I bore in mind. The first was the science itself. The
American aim in SDI was to develop a new and much more effective
defence against ballistic missiles. This would be what was called a
‘multi-layered’ Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD), using both ground and
space-based weapons. This concept of defence rested on the ability to
attack incoming ballistic missiles at all stages of their flight, from the
boost phase when the missile and all its warheads and decoys were
together — the best moment — right up to the point of re-entry of the
earth’s atmosphere on its way to the target. Scientific advances opened
up new possibilities to make such defence far more effective than the
existing Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) defences. The main advances
which appeared likely were in the use of kinetic energy weapons
(which were non-nuclear and which, when launched at high speed
against the nuclear missile, would smash it) and in the use of laser
weapons. Even more challenging than the development of these
different elements of SDI, however, was the requirement for an
enormously powerful and sophisticated computer capability to direct
and coordinate the system as a whole. Such an undertaking would not
only require huge sums of money but also test the ultimate creative
abilities of the western and communist systems competing for it.
The second element to be considered was the existing international
agreements limiting the deployment of weapons in space and ABM
systems. The 1972 ABM Treaty, as amended by a 1974 Protocol,
allowed the United States and the Soviet Union to deploy one static

ABM system with up to one hundred launchers in defence of either an
Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) silo field or the national
capital. The precise implications of the treaty for the research, testing,
development and deployment of new kinds of ABM system were
subject to heated legalistic dispute. The Soviets had started out with a
‘broad interpretation’ of the treaty which they narrowed when it later
suited them. Within the American Administration there were those
who pressed for a ‘broader than broad’ interpretation which would
have placed almost no effective constraint on the development and
deployment of SDI. The Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defence
always sought to urge the narrowest possible interpretation, which the
Americans — rightly in my view — believed would have meant that
SDI was stillborn. I always tried to steer away from this phraseology
and made it clear in private and public that research on whether a
system was viable could not be said to have been completed until it
had been successfully tested. Underneath the jargon, this apparently
technical point was really a matter of straight common sense. But it
was to become the issue dividing the United States and the USSR at
the Reykjavik summit and so assumed great importance.
The third element in the calculation was the relative strength of the
two sides in Ballistic Missile Defence. Only the Soviet Union possessed
a working ABM system (known as GALOSH) around Moscow, which
they were currently up-grading. The Americans had never deployed an
equivalent system. The United States assessed that the Soviets were
spending in the order of $ 1 billion a year on their research
programme of defence against ballistic missiles. Also the Soviets were
further advanced in anti-satellite weapons. There was, therefore, a
strong argument that the Soviets had already acquired an
unacceptable advantage in this whole area.
The fourth element was the implications of SDI for deterrence. I
started off with a good deal of sympathy for the thinking behind the
ABM Treaty. This was that the more sophisticated and effective the
defence against nuclear missiles, the greater the pressure to seek
hugely expensive advances in nuclear weapons technology. I was
always a believer in a slightly qualified version of the doctrine known
as MAD — ‘mutually assured destruction’. The threat of (what I
preferred to call) ‘unacceptable destruction’ which would follow from
a nuclear exchange was such that nuclear weapons were an effective
deterrent against not just nuclear but also conventional war. I had to
consider whether SDI was likely to undermine that. On one argument,
of course, it would. If any power believed that it had a completely
effective shield against nuclear weapons it had, in theory, a greater
temptation to use them. I knew — and post-war experience
demonstrated beyond doubt — that the United States would never
start a war by launching a first strike against the Soviet Union,
whether it believed that it was secure from retaliation or not. The
Soviets, by contrast, claimed to have no such confidence.

But I soon began to see that SDI would strengthen not weaken the
nuclear deterrent. Unlike President Reagan and some other members
of his Administration I never believed that SDI could offer one
hundred per cent protection, but it would allow sufficient United
States missiles to survive a first strike by the Soviets. Theoretically, the
US would then be in a position to launch its own nuclear weapons
against the Soviet Union. It follows that the Soviets would be far less
likely to yield to the temptation to use nuclear weapons in the first
place.
The decisive argument for me, however, was precisely the one
which made me reject President Reagan’s vision of a nuclear weaponfree world. It was that you could not ultimately hold back research on
SDI any more than you could prevent research into new kinds of
offensive weapons. We had to be the first to get it. Science is
unstoppable: it will not be stopped for being ignored. The deployment
of SDI, just like the deployment of nuclear weapons, must be carefully
controlled and negotiated. But research, which necessarily involved
testing, must go ahead.
DISCUSSION OF SDI AT CAMP DAVID
It was the subject of SDI which dominated my talks with President
Reagan and members of his Administration when I went to Camp
David on Saturday 22 December 1984 to brief the Americans on my
earlier talks with Mr Gorbachev. This was the first occasion on which I
had heard President Reagan speaking about SDI. He did so with
passion. He was at his most idealistic. He stressed that SDI would be a
defensive system and that it was not his intention to obtain for the
United States a unilateral advantage. Indeed, he said that if SDI
succeeded he would be ready to internationalize it so that it was at the
service of all countries, and he had told Mr Gromyko as much. He
reaffirmed his long-term goal of getting rid of nuclear weapons
entirely.
These remarks made me nervous. I was horrified to think that the
United States would be prepared to throw away a hard-won lead in
technology by making it internationally available. (Fortunately the
Soviets never believed that he would.) But I did not raise this directly.
Instead, I concentrated on my areas of agreement with the President. I
said that it was essential to pursue the research, but that if this
reached the point where a decision had to be made to produce and
deploy weapons in space a very different situation would arise.
Deployment would not be consistent either with the 1972 ABM Treaty
or the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. Both of these would have to be
renegotiated. I also explained my concern about the possible
intermediate effect of SDI on the doctrine of deterrence. I was worried
that deployment of a Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD) system would be
destabilizing and that while it was being constructed a pre-emptive

first strike against it would become an attractive option. But I
acknowledged that I might well not be fully informed of all the
technical aspects and wanted to hear more. In all this I was keen to
probe the Americans, not just in order to learn more of their intentions
but to ensure that they had clearly thought through the implications of
the steps they were now taking.
What I heard, now that we got down to discussion of the likely
reality rather than the grand vision, was reassuring. President Reagan
did not pretend that they yet knew where the research could finally
lead. But he emphasized that — in addition to his earlier arguments in
favour of SDI — keeping up with the United States would impose an
economic strain on the Soviet Union. He argued that there had to be a
practical limit as to how far the Soviet Government could push their
people down the road of austerity. As so often, he had instinctively
grasped the key to the whole question. What would the effects be of
SDI on the Soviet Union? In fact, as he foresaw, the Soviets did recoil
in the face of the challenge of SDI, finally renouncing the goal of
military superiority which alone had given them the confidence to
resist the demands for reform in their own system. But of course this
still lay in the future.
What I wanted now was an agreed position on SDI to which both
the President and I could lend our support, even though our long-term
view of its potential was different. I had been thinking about this over
the last few days and particularly on the long flight from Peking where
I had been for the signing of the Joint Declaration on Hong Kong. I
now jotted down, while talking to National Security Adviser Bud
McFarlane, the four points which seemed to me to be crucial.
My officials then filled in the details. The President and I agreed a
text which set out the policy.
The main section of my statement reads:
I told the President of my firm conviction that the SDI research programme
should go ahead. Research is, of course, permitted under existing US/Soviet
treaties; and we, of course, know that the Russians already have their
research programme and, in the US view, have already gone beyond
research. We agreed on four points: (1) the US, and western, aim was not to
achieve superiority, but to maintain balance, taking account of Soviet
developments; (2) SDI-related deployment would, in view of treaty
obligations, have to be a matter for negotiation; (3) the overall aim is to
enhance, not undercut, deterrence; (4) East-West negotiation should aim to
achieve security with reduced levels of offensive systems on both sides. This
will be the purpose of the resumed US-Soviet negotiations on arms control,
which I warmly welcome.

I subsequently learnt that George Shultz thought that I had secured
too great a concession on the Americans’ part in the wording; but in
fact it gave them and us a clear and defensible line and helped
reassure the European members of NATO. A good day’s work.

VISIT TO WASHINGTON: FEBRUARY 1985
I again visited Washington in February 1985. Arms talks between the
Americans and the Soviet Union had now resumed, but SDI remained
a source of contention. I was to address a joint meeting of Congress on
the morning of Wednesday 20 February and I brought with me from
London as a gift a bronze statue of Winston Churchill, who had also
many years before been honoured with such an invitation. I worked
specially hard on this speech. I would use the Autocue for its delivery.
I knew that Congress would have seen the ‘Great Communicator’
himself delivering faultless speeches and I would have a discriminating
audience. So I resolved to practise speaking the text until I had got
every intonation and emphasis right. (Speaking to Autocue, I should
add, is a totally different technique to speaking from notes.) In fact, I
borrowed President Reagan’s own Autocue and had it brought back to
the British Embassy where I was staying. Harvey Thomas, who
accompanied me, fixed it up and, ignoring any jetlag, I practised until
4 a.m. I did not go to bed, beginning the new working day with my
usual black coffee and vitamin pills, then gave television interviews
from 6.45 a.m., had my hair done and was ready at 10.30 to leave for
the Capitol. I used my speech, which ranged widely over international
issues, to give strong support for SDI. I had a terrific reception.
I regarded the quid pro quo for my strong public support of the
President as being the right to be direct with him and members of his
Administration in private. It was a little more awkward on this
occasion for I had brought Geoffrey Howe and Michael Heseltine with
me for my meeting and working lunch with the President, which made
for a more stilted and less satisfactory conversation than on other
occasions. (I did not bring them again.) But I went to the heart of what
was worrying me. I told President Reagan that I thought it was
important to avoid exaggerated rhetoric about SDI. We must not get
into a situation where people were told that nuclear weapons were
wicked, immoral and might soon be rendered unnecessary by the
development of defensive systems. Otherwise the British public’s
support for them would be eroded. I think that the President took this
point. He, for his part, emphasized that SDI was not going to be a
bargaining chip. The United States would not go to Geneva and offer
to give up SDI research if the Russians reduced nuclear weapons by a
certain amount. He was to prove as good as his word.
REYKJAVIK
The following month (March 1985) saw the death of Mr Chernenko
and, with remarkably little delay, the succession of Mr Gorbachev to
the Soviet leadership. Once again I attended a Moscow funeral: the
weather was, if anything, even colder than at Yuri Andropov’s. Mr

Gorbachev had a large number of foreign dignitaries to see. But I had
almost an hour’s talk with him that evening in St Katherine’s Hall in
the Kremlin. The atmosphere was more formal than at Chequers and
the silent, sardonic presence of Mr Gromyko did not help. But I was
able to explain to them the implications of the policy I had agreed
with President Reagan the previous December at Camp David. It was
clear that SDI was now the main preoccupation of the Soviets in arms
control.
Mr Gorbachev brought, as we had expected, a new style to the
Soviet Government. He spoke openly of the terrible state of the Soviet
economy, though at this stage he was still relying on the methods
associated with Mr Andropov’s drive for greater efficiency rather than
radical reform. An example of this was the draconian measures he
took against alcoholism. As the year wore on, however, there was no
evidence of improvement in conditions in the Soviet Union. Indeed, as
our new — and first-class — ambassador to Moscow, Bryan Cart-ledge,
who had been my foreign affairs private secretary when I first became
Prime Minister, pointed out in one of his first despatches, it was a
matter of, ‘jam tomorrow and, meanwhile, no vodka today’.
A distinct chill entered into Britain’s relations with the Soviet Union
as a result of expulsions which I authorized of Soviet officials who had
been spying. The defection of Oleg Gordievsky, a former top KGB
officer, meant that the Soviets knew how well informed we were about
their activities. I had several meetings with Mr Gordievsky and had the
highest regard for his judgement about events in the USSR. I
repeatedly tried — without success — to have the Soviets release his
family to join him in the West. (They eventually came after the failed
coup in August 1991.)
In November President Reagan and Mr Gorbachev had their first
meeting in Geneva. Not much of substance came out of it — the
Soviets insisted on linking cuts in strategic nuclear weapons to an end
to SDI research — but a good personal rapport quickly developed
between the two leaders (though not, sadly, between their wives).
There had been some concern expressed that President Reagan might
be outmanoeuvred by his sharp-witted and younger Soviet
counterpart. But he was not, which I found not at all surprising. For
Ronald Reagan had had plenty of practice in his early years as
President of the Screen Actors Guild in dealing with hard-headed trade
union negotiations — and no one was more hard-headed than Mr
Gorbachev.
During 1986 Mr Gorbachev showed great subtlety in playing on
western public opinion by bringing forward tempting, but
unacceptable, proposals on arms control. Relatively little was said by
the Soviets on the link between SDI and cuts in nuclear weapons. But
they were given no reason to believe that the Americans were
prepared to suspend or stop SDI research. Late in the year it was
agreed that President Reagan and Mr Gorbachev — with their Foreign

ministers — should meet in Reykjavik, Iceland, to discuss substantive
proposals.
In retrospect, the Reykjavik summit on that weekend of 11 and 12
October can be seen to have a quite different significance than most of
the commentators at the time realized. A trap had been prepared for
the Americans. Ever greater Soviet concessions were made during the
summit: they agreed for the first time that the British and French
deterrents should be excluded from the INF negotiations; and that cuts
in strategic nuclear weapons should leave each side with equal
numbers — rather than a straight percentage cut, which would have
left the Soviets well ahead. They also made significant concessions on
INF numbers. As the summit drew to an end President Reagan was
proposing an agreement by which the whole arsenal of strategic
nuclear weapons — bombers, long-range Cruise and ballistic missiles
— would be halved within five years and the most powerful of these
weapons, strategic ballistic missiles, eliminated altogether within ten.
Mr Gorbachev was even more ambitious: he wanted the elimination of
all strategic nuclear weapons by the end of the ten-year period.
But then suddenly, at the very end, the trap was sprung. President
Reagan had conceded that during the ten-year period both sides would
agree not to withdraw from the ABM Treaty, though development and
testing compatible with the Treaty would be allowed. Mr Gorbachev
said that the whole thing depended on confining SDI to the laboratory
— a much tighter restriction that was likely to kill the prospect of an
effective SDI. The President rejected the deal and the summit broke
up. Its failure was widely portrayed as the result of the foolish
intransigence of an elderly American President, obsessed with an
unrealizable dream. In fact, President Reagan’s refusal to trade away
SDI for the apparent near fulfilment of his dream of a nuclear-free
world was crucial to the victory over communism. He called the
Soviets’ bluff. The Russians may have scored an immediate
propaganda victory when the talks broke down. But they had lost the
game and I have no doubt that they knew it.* For they must have
realized by now that they could not hope to match the United States in
the competition for military technological supremacy and many of the
concessions they made at Reykjavik proved impossible for them to
retrieve.
My own reaction when I heard how far the Americans had been
prepared to go was as if there had been an earthquake beneath my
feet. I supported the idea of a 50 per cent reduction in strategic
ballistic missiles over five years, but the President’s proposal to
eliminate them altogether after ten years was a different matter. The
whole system of nuclear deterrence which had kept the peace for forty
years was close to being abandoned. Had the President’s proposals
gone through, they would also have effectively killed off the Trident
missile, forcing us to acquire a different system if we were to keep an
independent nuclear deterrent. My intense relief that Soviet duplicity

had finally caused these proposals to be withdrawn was balanced by a
gnawing anxiety that they might well be put forward on some new
occasion. I had always disliked the original INF ‘zero option’, because I
felt that these weapons made up for western Europe’s unpreparedness
to face a sudden, massive attack by the Warsaw Pact; I had gone along
with it in the hope that the Soviets would never accept. But extending
this approach more generally to all strategic ballistic missiles would
have left the Soviets confronting western Europe with a huge
superiority of conventional forces, chemical weapons and short-range
missiles. It also undermined the credibility of deterrence: talk about
eliminating strategic ballistic missiles (and possibly nuclear weapons
altogether) at some point in the future raised doubts in people’s minds
about whether the United States was prepared to use nuclear weapons
in the present. Somehow I had to get the Americans back onto the firm
ground of a credible policy of nuclear deterrence. I arranged to fly to
the United States to see President Reagan.
FURTHER DISCUSSIONS OF NUCLEAR
STRATEGY AT CAMP DAVID
I have never felt more conscious than in the preparation for this visit
of how much hung on my relationship with the President. It seemed to
me that we were poised between a remarkable success and a possible
catastrophe. I received the fullest briefing from the military about the
implications of a defence strategy involving the elimination of all
ballistic missiles. It was argued in some quarters in the US
Administration that NATO strategy would not be undermined by the
elimination of strategic ballistic missiles, and that aircraft, Cruise
missiles and nuclear artillery, in all of which it was thought the West
had a superiority, would provide an even better deterrent. In fact,
NATO’s whole strategy of flexible response — dependent as it was on a
full range of possible military, including nuclear, responses to a Soviet
attack — would have ceased to be viable. The so-called ‘Air Breathing
Systems’ (Cruise missiles and bombers) were less certain to penetrate
Soviet defences and generally more vulnerable to a pre-emptive strike.
That would weaken their deterrent value. Europe would be
dangerously exposed.
Just as important were the political considerations. To provide a
credible British deterrent using Cruise missiles rather than Trident
might be twice as expensive. Was it really likely that in an atmosphere
full of talk of a world free of nuclear weapons we would ever obtain
public support for such a programme? The more closely I examined
the implications, the worse they were.
Percy Cradock (my Special Adviser on security matters), Charles
Powell and I drafted and redrafted the arguments I would use with
President Reagan. These must be logically coherent, persuasive, crisp
and not too technical.

I flew into Washington on the afternoon of Friday 14 November.
That evening I practised my arguments in meetings with George
Schultz and Cap Weinberger. I saw George Bush for breakfast the
following morning and then left for Camp David where I was met by
President Reagan.
To my great relief I found that the President quickly understood
why I was so deeply concerned about what had happened in
Reykjavik. He agreed the draft statement which we had finalized after
talking to George Shultz the previous day and which I subsequently
issued at my press conference. This stated our policy on arms control
after Reykjavik. It ran as follows:
We agreed that priority should be given to: an INF agreement, with restraints
on shorter range systems; a 50 per cent cut over 5 years in the US and Soviet
strategic offensive weapons; and a ban on chemical weapons. In all three
cases, effective verification would be an essential element. We also agreed on
the need to press ahead with the SDI research programme which is permitted
by the ABM Treaty. We confirmed that NATO’s strategy of forward defence
and flexible response would continue to require effective nuclear deterrence,
based on a mix of systems. At the same time, reductions in nuclear weapons
would increase the importance of eliminating conventional disparities.
Nuclear weapons cannot be dealt with in isolation, given the need for stable
overall balance at all times. We were also in agreement that these matters
should continue to be the subject of close consultation within the alliance.
The President reaffirmed the United States’ intention to proceed with its
strategic modernization programme, including Trident. He also confirmed
his full support for the arrangements made to modernize Britain’s
independent nuclear deterrent, with Trident.
I had reason to be well pleased.

PREPARATION FOR MOSCOW VISIT
It is easy to imagine what the effect of the Camp David statement must
have been in Moscow. It meant the end of the Soviets’ hope of using
SDI and President Reagan’s dream of a nuclear weapons-free world to
advance their strategy of denuclearizing Europe, leaving us vulnerable
to military blackmail and weakening the link between the American
and European pillars of NATO. It also demonstrated that, whether they
liked it or not, I was able to have some influence on President Reagan
on fundamental issues of alliance policy. Mr Gorbachev, therefore, had
as much reason to do business with me as I with him. Add to this the
fact that the Soviets often preferred to deal with right-wing western
governments, because they regarded them as hard-headed negotiators
who would nonetheless keep a bargain when it has been reached, and
that I had struck up such a good personal relationship with Mr
Gorbachev at Chequers before he became leader, and it is no surprise
that I was soon invited to Moscow.
I prepared myself very thoroughly. On Friday 27 February 1987 I
held an all-day seminar on the Soviet Union at Chequers. The two

opposing tendencies among Sovietologists, which I have mentioned
earlier, were apparent on this occasion. The enthusiasts stressed the
scope and energy of Mr Gorbachev’s reforms. The sceptics emphasized
the orthodox communist objectives which Mr Gorbachev was pursuing
and the limited effect even these modest measures of reform were
having. On balance, the sceptics probably had the better of the
argument. The view was that fundamental change was not on the
agenda, only limited change which fully preserved the powers and
guiding role of the Communist Party. Although Mr Gorbachev might
want to enjoy the fruits of the incentive system, he could not take the
risk of adopting it. Reform would, therefore, be conducted firmly
within the bounds of the socialist system. In retrospect, it is possible to
see that this analysis was flawed by a confusion between the intentions
of Mr Gorbachev, which at any particular time were limited both by
his communist way of thinking and by the circumstances of the
moment, and the effects of his reforms, which unleashed forces that
would sweep away the Soviet system and the Soviet state.
The seminar was only one aspect of my preparations. I also read
through in detail the — usually long and indigestible — speeches
which Mr Gorbachev had been making. Even though the political
language was so different from that which I would have used, I felt
that something new was emerging from them. Of these, by far the
most important to date was that which he delivered to the Central
Committee of the Communist Party towards the end of January 1987.
In this he placed a new emphasis on democratizing the Party and, at
the local level, the Soviet body politic itself: the forthcoming Soviet
local elections would allow the nomination of more candidates than
seats available in a small number of multi-member constituencies. This
would prove to be the beginning — though only the beginning — of
the replacement of democratic centralism by real democracy in the
Soviet Union.
Soviet politics worked on the basis of slogans. These could not be
taken at face value nor given a western interpretation. But, equally,
they had to be taken seriously. The slogans under Mr Gorbachev were
definitely changing. Perestroika(restructuring) had taken over from
uskorenie(acceleration), reflecting his understanding that the
fundamental problems of the Soviet economy required not just more of
the same — central controls, discipline, efficiency drives — but real
radical change. Similarly, the new talk of glasnost(openness) was based
on an understanding that, unless the facts were known and at least
some of the truth told about what was going on, conditions could
never improve.
In the two years since Mr Gorbachev had become Soviet leader, the
political reforms were already more evident than the economic
benefits. Although there was precious little evidence of the Soviet
economy working better, there was far more discussion of the need for
political freedom and democracy. Mr Gorbachev had gone to great

lengths to win over some of the leading dissidents, particularly
Professor Sakharov, to support his programme. The truth about the
horrors of Stalin — though not yet of Lenin — began to be published.
The Soviets started to show greater sensitivity on matters of human
rights, allowing more — though by no means all — Soviet Jews who
wished to emigrate to do so. Whatever Mr Gorbachev’s long-term
goals, there was no doubt in my mind that he was making the Soviet
Union something better than a ‘prison house of nations’ and we ought
to support him in his efforts.
Such support was certainly needed. Although there was a freer
political atmosphere and the improvements in political conditions
endeared him to some of the intellectuals, ordinary Soviet citizens saw
no real material progress. And though many members of the Politburo
and the Central Committee had been replaced, it did not follow that
all these replacements necessarily supported Mr Gorbachev and
reform. There were worries too about the attitude of the army and the
KGB. All this posed the Soviet leader with a dilemma — and created a
dilemma for us too.
Above all, the West had to ensure that Mr Gorbachev’s reforms led
to practical improvements in our own security. Were the Soviets
prepared to reduce their military threat? Were they prepared to
withdraw from Afghanistan? Would they end their policy of
international subversion? We must press them on all these matters, but
not in such as way that Mr Gorbachev’s reform programme was
discredited and so reversed, either by him or a hardline successor.
In the course of March I welcomed a stream of visitors to No. 10 and
Chequers to brief me before my visit. The Chief Rabbi came to see me
about the plight of the refuseniks. Peter Walker gave me his own
impressions of the Soviet Union, gained on a recent visit. I discussed
arrangements for the trip with the Soviet Ambassador. General
Abrahamson, the Pentagon’s Director of the SDI programme, came to
Chequers to give me an up-to-date account of the state of research and
the strategic issues. Oleg Gordievsky gave me the benefit of his
analysis. So did the human rights activist, Yuri Orlov.
I was not going to Moscow as the representative of the West, let
alone as a ‘broker’ between the USSR and the United States, but it was
clearly very important that other western leaders should know the line
I intended to take and that I should gauge their sentiments
beforehand. I knew President Reagan’s mind and had, I knew, his
confidence. I therefore limited myself to sending him a lengthy
message. There was only one specific policy point at issue which I felt
it necessary to raise. This was a proposal, which I had made to the
Americans and which they were studying but were not so far prepared
to accept, that the United States should give the Soviets an assurance
about the shape and time-scale of SDI — what was known in the
jargon as ‘predictability’. My argument was that since it would take a
number of years before the decision about the deployment of SDI need

be reached there was no point in alarming the Soviets unnecessarily
now.
I also arranged to meet President Mitterrand and then Chancellor
Kohl on Monday 23 March. The French President — socialist or not —
has the use of a number of delightful châ teaux. He also seems to have
access to the best chefs in the French Republic. Lunch with him at the
Châ teau de Benouville in Normandy was no exception. And of course
each dish had to have a traditional Norman flavour, with sauces of
cider or calvados and some of that aromatic Camembert against which
the health-conscious bureaucrats of the European Community were to
labour in vain. President Mitterrand’s attitude to the Soviets was very
like my own. He believed, as I did, that Mr Gorbachev was prepared to
go a long way to change the system. One of his shrewdest and most
perceptive observations was that the Soviet leader would find that
‘when you change the form, you are on the way to changing the
substance.’ But the French President knew too that the Soviets
respected toughness. He said that we must resist the attempt to
denuclearize Europe. I warmly agreed.
Nor did I find any disagreement with Chancellor Kohl. The division
of Germany, past history and the existence of large numbers of
Germans living as minorities throughout the Soviet bloc gave this very
German leader a clear insight into the USSR. Moreover, as he
reminded me, West Germany had for many years been the main target
of Soviet propaganda. He had doubts about whether Mr Gorbachev
would survive: he was running a high-risk policy. Nor should we
assume that his reforms — which Chancellor Kohl saw as intended to
modernize a communist system, not create a democratic system —
could be carried through without suffering. Helmut Kohl always had a
strong sense of history and he reminded me that from the time of Peter
the Great the reforms of Russian leaders had not been without their
victims.
My last public pronouncement about the Soviet Union before I left
had been my speech to the Conservative Central Council in Torquay
on Saturday 21 March. It would have been easy to tone down my
criticism of the Soviet regime. But I was not prepared to do so. Too
often in the past western leaders had placed the search for trouble-free
relations with foreign autocrats above plain speaking of the truth. I
said:
We have seen in Mr Gorbachev’s speeches a clear admission that the
communist system is not working. Far from enabling the Soviet Union to
catch up with the West, it is falling further behind. We hear new language
being used by their leaders. Words which we recognize, like ‘openness’ and
‘democratization’. But do they have the same meaning for them as they do
for us? Some of those who have been imprisoned for their political and
religious beliefs have been released. We welcome that. But many more
remain in prison or are refused permission to emigrate. We want to see them
free, or reunited with their families abroad, if that is what they choose …
When I go to Moscow to meet Mr Gorbachev next week, my goal will be a
peace based not on illusion or surrender, but on realism and strength …

Peace needs confidence and trust between countries and peoples. Peace
means an end to the killing in Cambodia, an end to the slaughter in
Afghanistan. It means honouring the obligations which the Soviet Union
freely accepted in the Helsinki Final Act in 1975 to allow free movement of
people and ideas and other basic human rights … We shall reach our
judgements not on words, not on intentions, not on promises, but on actions
and results.

VISIT TO THE SOVIET UNION:
MARCH-APRIL 1987
I left Heathrow for Moscow just after midday on Saturday 28 March. I
always used a special VC10 for these flights. A dozen of these aircraft
were permanently based at Brize Norton and two or three of them had
been adapted for ministerial overseas visits. The VC10 was not a
modern aircraft and was rather noisy. But it was pleasant to fly in and
had two big advantages. One was that there was plenty of space for
me and my staff. There were tables to work at. There was a separate
compartment for me to get an hour or two’s sleep when allowed
respite from writing speeches and reading papers. There was even
room for journalists towards the rear of the aircraft. The other
advantage was the RAF staff who provided us with delicious food,
drink and friendly service.
When I landed, there was an official welcoming ceremony which
began at Moscow Airport, where I was presented with a large bouquet
of red roses which proved remarkably photogenic against my plain
black coat and fox-fur hat. We then sped down the centre of the road,
reserved for high officials and their guests, to the Kremlin. There I had
to make my way down the length of St George’s Hall, under its
glittering crystal chandeliers, to meet Mr and Mrs Gorbachev and to
exchange formal pleasantries. I cannot deny that I enjoyed the
splendour of these occasions, but I sometimes reflected that the
traditional formalities were intended to clothe in the trappings of
legitimacy regimes that had neither historic nor democratic
credentials.
On Sunday morning I was driven fifty miles out from Moscow to the
Russian Orthodox Monastery at Zagorsk. I knew that this was a very
important time for Orthodox Christians in Russia who, the following
year, would be celebrating the millennium of their Church. The Soviet
authorities had allowed some churches to reopen and the numbers of
seminarians to increase a little. There was also a slight increase in the
amount of religious literature allowed. As the Khrushchev years
showed — when religious persecution sharply increased, even though
in other areas liberalization occurred — there was no guarantee that
the pressure on Christians would be removed just because of glasnost
and perestroika. I felt it important that I should show solidarity.
Crowds were waiting outside the gates of the monastery when I
arrived. Against the wishes of the communist Minister for Religious

Affairs (sic) who accompanied me, I insisted on getting out of the car
to speak to them. Then I got back in and we were taken into the
grounds of the monastery itself. I had never attended an Orthodox
liturgy. I was struck by the richness of the singing, the clouds of
incense, the gorgeous vestments, the sensuousness of the total
experience. It was a far cry from the Sunday service at Finkin Street
Methodist Church in Grantham. I was also moved by the devotion of
the worshippers — it would be too much to say ‘the congregation’, for
so much of what was going on was evidently a matter of private
prayer, with people coming in and out to attend a part of the
apparently endless ritual. I stayed for forty minutes or so and then lit
one of the long, thin unbleached Orthodox candles, placing it in the
sandbox which contained so many others. I reflected that it would take
more than limited reforms of the communist system to contain the
power of this Christian revival.
The best that can be said of most of the Russian Orthodox leaders
was that they probably had little choice other than to collaborate so
closely with the communists. The worst that can be said was that they
were active KGB agents. Certainly, the speech which was given by the
Deputy Patriarch over lunch could have been drafted by Agitprop: it
concentrated heavily on the need to get rid of all nuclear weapons.
Discarding my own prepared text, I answered by stressing instead the
need to release prisoners of conscience. In the car, on the way back to
Moscow, I asked the Minister for Religious Affairs whether there were
still people in gaol for their religious beliefs. He said, ‘No, unless they
are in for something else.’ Such as possessing a Bible, I thought.
That afternoon it had been arranged, at my suggestion, that I should
do a ‘walkabout’ of the sort which comes so easily to western
politicians but which the Soviets typically — and perhaps for good
reason — avoided. (Mr Gorbachev, though, was in this, as in other
matters, a western-style politician.) As I walked around a large
housing estate in a bleak suburb of Moscow in the slushy snow and
bitter wind, more and more people gathered to meet me. Soon they
poured in from everywhere, a huge crowd cheering, smiling, wanting
to shake hands. As in Hungary I was being received rapturously as an
anti-communist by those who knew the system even better than I did.
That evening I attended a performance of Swan Lake at the Bolshoi
Theatre with the Gorbachevs. We shared a box. Like all good Russians,
they were both clearly enthusiasts for the ballet. I too enjoy the ballet,
almost as much as the opera, so we found this in common. During the
interval the Gorbachevs held a small supper party for me in a private
room. It was a relaxed occasion. For some reason the conversation
turned from the story of Swan Lake to the subject of bread-making in
the Soviet Union. Mr Gorbachev said that, partly as a result of help
which the Soviet Union had received from ICI, the quality of Soviet
bread was now much better than it had been. But it was difficult to
please people. When the quality had been lower, it had been necessary

to add salt. Now that the quality had improved, so that salt was no
longer necessary for the bread, the people still preferred salty bread.
He had told the Soviet minister responsible for bread-making to go on
television to explain to the people that they were now getting better
bread, even though it was not what they were familiar with. Ironically,
a similar point had recently been made by the great dissident Vladimir
Bukovsky. He remarked that whenever the Soviet media reported that
scientists had found that some food — sausage, say — was bad for
your health, the ordinary Russians reacted immediately by telling each
other: ‘So they’re running out of sausage.’ Such are the unanticipated
consequences of collectivism.
We drank some excellent Georgian wine. I was encouraged to have
another glass when Mr Gorbachev assured me that it helped some
Georgians to live to be a hundred. He was very conscious of the
unpopularity of the action he had taken against alcoholism. This had
already resulted in a decline in deaths at work and road accidents. But
it was an uphill struggle. He had read that people in the West thought
that perestroika was doomed because he had taken away alcohol from
the people and privileges from party officials. We lingered rather too
long over supper and the audience had been sitting in semi-darkness
for some time when we returned. When we bade farewell Mr
Gorbachev was still in a jovial mood and said that he looked forward
to our meeting tomorrow.
Monday began for me with a meeting of what it would be perhaps
impolite but only accurate to describe as impeccably distinguished
Soviet stooges. This group of tame artists, academics and scientists
took up again the themes which had been prominent in the Deputy
Patriarch’s speech. They knew, presumably, that I was to have lunch
with Dr Sakharov and other dissidents and wanted to extol the merits
of communism first. Then I left for my discussions with Mr Gorbachev
in the Kremlin.
I sat across the table from him, a long flower vase between us. I was
accompanied by just one member of my staff and an interpreter. It was
soon clear that he, glancing from time to time at the notes in front of
him, intended to take me to task for my Central Council speech. He
said that when the Soviet leaders had studied it they had felt the
breeze of the 1940s and ‘50s. It reminded them of Winston Churchill’s
speech at Fulton, Missouri (about the ‘Iron Curtain’) and the Truman
doctrine. They had even considered whether they might have to cancel
the visit.
I did not apologize. I said that there was one point which I did not
make in my Central Council speech but which I would make now. This
was that I knew of no evidence that the Soviet Union had given up the
Brezhnev doctrine or the goal of securing world domination for
communism. We were ready to fight the battle of ideas: indeed this
was the right way to fight. But instead we in the West saw Soviet
subversion in South Yemen, in Ethiopia, in Mozambique, in Angola

and in Nicaragua. We saw Vietnam being supported by the Soviet
Union in its conquest of Cambodia. We saw Afghanistan occupied by
Soviet troops. We naturally drew the conclusion that the goal of
worldwide communism was still being pursued. This was a crucial
consideration for the West. We recognized that Mr Gorbachev was
committed to internal reforms in the Soviet Union. But we had to ask
ourselves whether this would lead to changes in external policies.
I went on to show that I had read Mr Gorbachev’s speeches with as
much care as he seemed to have read mine. I told him that I had found
his January Central Committee speech fascinating. But I wanted to
know whether the internal changes he was making would lead to
changes in the Soviet Union’s foreign policies as well. I added that I
had not expected that we would have generated quite so much heat so
early in the discussion. Mr Gorbachev replied with a roar of laughter
that he welcomed ‘acceleration’ and was pleased we were speaking
frankly.
The conversation went back and forth, not just covering regional
conflicts (with me placing much of the blame on the Soviet Union and
Mr Gorbachev blaming the West), but going right to the heart of what
differentiated the western and communist systems. This I described as
being a distinction between societies in which power was dispersed
and societies based on central control and coercion.
Mr Gorbachev was as critical of Conservatism as I was of
communism. But he was a good deal less well informed about it. His
view was that the British Conservative Party was the party of the
‘haves’ in Britain and that our system of what he called ‘bourgeois
democracy’ was designed to fool people about who really controlled
the levers of power. I explained that what I was trying to do was to
create a society of ‘haves’, not a class of them.
We then turned to arms control. As at our meeting at Chequers, he
showed that he was well versed in all that was being written about the
Soviet Union in the West. He knew that it was being openly said that
the Soviet Union would need to reduce its military budget to finance
the development of the civil economy and that the Soviets were
desperate for arms agreements. He was clearly extremely sensitive and
worried about being humiliated by the West. In particular, he blamed
me for frustrating the moves towards the elimination of nuclear
weapons which had been discussed at Reykjavik. (So the Camp David
statement had indeed been noticed.) I found myself arguing, yet again,
the case for the retention of the nuclear deterrent. I also said that it
was quite clear to me that the Soviet Union’s objective was to bring
about the denuclearization of Europe, leaving the USSR with a
preponderance of conventional and chemical weapons. But I welcomed
the fact that Mr Gorbachev had now broken the link, to which the
Soviets had previously held, between an INF Agreement and other
arms control issues, such as SDI. At this point I returned — rather late
because our animated argument had overrun the scheduled time limit

— to lunch with the Sakharovs and other former dissidents who were
now supporting the Gorbachev reforms. I was impressed by what they
told me of the changes being made. But I told them that it was not
enough to support Mr Gorbachev now; they should be prepared to
support him in five to ten years’ time when the going got really tough.
I said that the costs of reform would be apparent long before the
benefits.
I then returned to the Kremlin to continue my talks with Mr
Gorbachev. St Katherine’s Hall, where we had met that morning, was
now being rearranged for the plenary session which was due to follow.
So we were moved to the ‘Red Room’ of the Kremlin, which Mr
Gorbachev said he hoped might improve my views. The afternoon
discussion was less contentious and more informative. He explained to
me the economic reforms he was making and the problems still to be
faced. This led on to technology. He claimed to be confident about the
Soviet Union’s capacity for developing computers in competition with
the United States. But I was not convinced. And that led back to SDI
which Mr Gorbachev promised the Soviets would match — in some
way that he would not disclose. I tried to interest him in my proposal
for greater ‘predictability’ as regards the progress of the American SDI
programme, but apparently to no avail.
Then I pressed Mr Gorbachev on human rights in general and the
treatment of the Jews in particular. I also raised the question of
Afghanistan, where I had the impression that he was searching for
some way out. Finally, I listed the points which I thought we could
agree on for a public account of our discussion which, he agreed, had
contributed to better relations and greater confidence between us. But
it was now very late. Guests were already assembling for the formal
banquet at which I was to speak. The plenary session was abandoned.
Putting diplomacy ahead of fashion, I abandoned my plans to return to
the embassy and change: I attended the banquet in the short wool
dress I had been wearing all day. I felt rather like Ninotchka in
reverse.
Tuesday began with a rather dull meeting with Prime Minister
Ryzhkov — apparently a pleasant, competent man, who, alas, could
never quite escape from the armour of his communist training — and
other Soviet ministers. I had hoped to learn more about the Soviet
economic reforms, but we got bogged down once again in arms control
and then in bilateral trade issues.
Far more exciting and worthwhile for all concerned was the
interview which I gave to three journalists from Soviet Television. I
learnt afterwards that this had an enormous impact on Soviet opinion.
Most of the questions related to nuclear weapons. I defended the
West’s line and indeed the retention of the nuclear deterrent. I went on
to point out that there were more nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union
than in any other country and that the Soviets had led the way on
deploying short- and intermediate-range weapons as well. I reminded

them of their huge superiority in conventional and chemical weapons.
I pointed out that the Soviet Union was ahead of the United States in
ABM defences. Nobody had ever told ordinary Russians these facts.
They learned them from my interview for the first time. The interview
was allowed to go out uncut from Soviet television, which I afterwards
regarded as proof that my confidence in Mr Gorbachev’s basic
integrity was not misplaced.
That evening the Gorbachevs gave me dinner in an old mansion,
converted many years before for entertaining foreign guests. The
atmosphere was, perhaps deliberately, as close to that of Chequers as I
ever found in the Soviet Union. In the rooms around which Mr
Gorbachev showed us, Churchill, Eden, Stalin and Molotov had
smoked, drunk, and argued. We were a small group, the Gorbachevs
being joined by just the Ryzhkovs, who did not take a very active part
in the conversation. A brightly burning log fire — again like Chequers
— illumined the room to which we later withdrew to put right the
world’s problems over coffee and liqueurs. I saw two interesting
examples of the way in which old Marxist certainties were being
challenged. There was a lively argument between the Gorbachevs,
which I provoked, about the definition of the ‘working class’ about
which we heard so much in Soviet propaganda. I wanted to know how
they defined this in the Soviet Union — a point of some substance in a
system in which, as the old Polish saying goes, ‘we pretend to work
and they pretend to pay us.’ Mrs Gorbachev thought that anyone who
worked, whatever his job or profession, was a worker. Her husband
argued initially that only the blue-collar workers counted. But he then
reconsidered and said that this was largely an historical or
‘scientific’ (that is Marxist) term which did not do justice to the
diversity of today’s society.
The second indication of a break with old socialist certainties was
when he told me — with tantalizingly little detail — of plans which
were being discussed for increasing people’s incomes and then having
them make some payment for public services like health and
education. Not surprisingly, such plans, whatever they were, came to
nothing.
The following morning I had breakfast with refuseniks at the British
Embassy. Theirs was a disturbing tale of heroism under mainly petty
but continual persecution. Every obstacle, short of total prohibition,
was put in the way of their worship and expression of cultural
identity. They were discriminated against at work — if they found
work. They told me that giving private tuition was the easiest way to
earn a living: for these were educated people whose talents the Soviet
state should have been able to draw upon. One of their leaders, Iosif
Begun, brought me a tiny Star of David, which he had carved out of
horn while he was in prison and which I have always kept.
Later that morning I left Moscow for Tbilisi in Georgia. I had wanted
to see a Soviet republic other than Russia and I knew that Georgia

would present a great cultural and geographical contrast. This
certainly proved to be the case. From all that I saw — and from the
excellent and exotic food and Georgian wine — it was clear to me that
given the right political and economic conditions this was an area
where the tourist industry could flourish. But, as in the detective story,
perhaps the most important feature of my admittedly brief visit was
the ‘dog which did not bark’. Although I was presented with all the
evidence of a vigorous folklore and although I knew how ancient and
distinctive Georgia was — only coming under the control of Russia at
the beginning of the nineteenth century — there was still no evidence
of that desire for national self-assertion and independence which was
to come.

That night I left Tbilisi Airport for London. It had been, quite
simply, the most fascinating and most important foreign visit I had
made. I could sense in the four days I spent in the Soviet Union that
the ground was shifting underneath the communist system. De
Tocqueville’s insight that ‘experience shows that the most dangerous
moment for a bad government is generally that in which it sets about
reform’ sprang to my mind. The welcome I had received — both the
warm affection from the Russian crowds, and the respect of the Soviet
authorities in long hours of negotiations — suggested that something
fundamental was happening under the surface. The West’s system of
liberty which Ronald Reagan and I personified in the eastern bloc
(thanks, ironically, to the effects of communist propaganda) was
increasingly in the ascendant: the Soviet system was showing its
cracks. I sensed that great changes were at hand — but I could never
have guessed how quickly they would come.
In February 1993 former senior Soviet officials confirmed precisely this point at a
conference at Princeton University on the end of the Cold War.
*

CHAPTER XVII

Putting the World to Rights
Diplomacy towards and visits to the Far East, the Middle East and
Africa — 1984–1990

When I was in Opposition I was very doubtful of the value of highprofile public diplomacy. To some extent I remain so. My political
philosophy in domestic affairs is founded on a deep scepticism about
the ability of politicians to change the fundamentals of the economy or
society: the best they can do is to create a framework in which
people’s talents and virtues are mobilized not crushed. Similarly, in
foreign affairs, the underlying realities of power are not transformed
by meetings and understandings between heads of government. A
country with a weak economy, an unstable social base or an
ineffective administration cannot compensate for these — at least for
long — with an ambitious diplomatic programme. That said, my
experience as Prime Minister did convince me that a skilfully
conducted foreign policy based on strength can magnify a country’s
influence and allow progess to be made in dealing with thorny
problems around the world. As the years went by, I put increasing
effort into international diplomacy.
But it is still necessary to have a clear idea of the potential and the
limits of statesmanship. The twin, opposing, temptations of the
statesman are hubris and timidity. It is easy to subscribe to ringing
declarations and ambitious global plans. It is a great deal harder to
balance vision with practical measures and persistence. Under some
circumstances, to try definitively to ‘solve’ a long-standing problem
will be to make it worse. Under others, even a brief delay will mean an
opportunity lost. The statesman has to be able to distinguish between
the two, always knowing the destination; never presuming that the
path is open; then, when it is, pressing ahead with every means
available.
And in all this one should never lose sight of the importance of the
personal chemistry which exists between those who conduct their
nation’s affairs. I found myself liking and respecting — and sometimes
heartily disliking and distrusting — heads of government not just as
politicians but as people. I did so irrespective of colour, creed or
political opinion. Personal relations must never become a substitute
for hard-headed pursuit of national interests. But nor should any
statesman ignore their importance. Foreign visits allowed me to meet,
talk to and seek to influence heads of government on their own
ground. These visits gave me insights into the way those I dealt with
in the clinical atmosphere of great international conferences actually

lived and felt. Moreover, it gave others a chance to know me.
Longevity has its drawbacks and difficulties in domestic politics,
where the media are always longing for a new face. But in foreign
affairs there is a huge and cumulative advantage in simply being
known both by politicians and by ordinary people around the world.
All of these elements were present in my dealings with and visits to
the Far East, the Middle East and Africa. In these regions — in the last
case a whole continent — the struggle between East and West was
being waged by influence and by arms. But in each that contest also
worked upon other issues particular to the region.
In the Far East, the dominant long-term questions concerned the
future role and development of a political and military super-power,
the People’s Republic of China, and an economic super-power, Japan;
though for Britain, it was the future of Hong Kong which had to take
precedence over everything else.
In the Middle East, it was the Iran-Iraq War, with its undercurrent of
destabilizing Muslim fundamentalism, which cost most lives and
threatened most economic harm. But I always felt that the Arab-Israeli
dispute was of even more abiding importance. For it was this which
time and again prevented the emergence — at least until the Gulf War
— of a solid bloc of more or less self-confident pro-western Arab
states, no longer having to look over their shoulders at what their
critics would make of the plight of the landless Palestinians.
Finally, in Africa — where, as in the Middle East, Britain was not
just another player in the great game, but a country with historic links
and a distinct, if not always favourable, image — it was the future of
South Africa which dominated all discussion. For reasons which will
become clear, no one had a better opportunity — or a more thankless
task — than I did in resolving an issue which had poisoned the West’s
relations with black Africa, left isolated the most advanced economic
power in that continent and been used, incidentally, to justify more
hypocrisy and hyperbole than I heard on any other subject.
THE FAR EAST
Hong Kong
My visit to China in September 1982 and my talks with Zhao Ziyang
and Deng Xiaoping had had three beneficial effects.* First, confidence
in Hong Kong about the future had been restored. Second, I now had a
very clear idea of what the Chinese would and would not accept.
Third, we had a form of words which both we and the Chinese could
use about the future of Hong Kong which would provide a basis for
continuing discussion between us. But there was a real risk that each
of these gains would be transitory. Confidence in the colony was
fragile. It was by no means clear how we could persuade the Chinese

to be more forthcoming with their assurances. And — what I found
most worrying — the Chinese proved very reluctant to get on with the
talks which I had envisaged when I left Peking. For months nothing
happened. I asked the advice of that old China hand, Henry Kissinger:
his response was ‘don’t worry — that’s just their way.’ But I was
worried and became more so as time passed.
On the morning of Friday 28 January 1983 I held a meeting with
ministers, officials and the Governor of Hong Kong to review the
position. We had learnt that in June the Chinese were proposing
unilaterally to announce their own plan for Hong Kong’s future. We
were all agreed that we must try to prevent this happening. I myself
had been doing some fundamental rethinking about our objectives. I
proposed that in the absence of progress in the talks we should now
develop the democratic structure in Hong Kong as though it were our
aim to achieve independence or self-government within a short period,
as we had done with Singapore. This would involve building up a
more Chinese government and administration in Hong Kong, with the
Chinese members increasingly taking their own decisions and with
Britain in an increasingly subordinate position. We might also consider
using referenda as an accepted institution there. Since then legislative
elections have demonstrated a strong appetite for democracy among
the Hong Kong Chinese, to which the Government has had to respond.
At that time, however, nobody else seemed much attracted by my
ideas: and in the end I had reluctantly to concede that since the
Chinese would not accept such an approach it was not then worth
studying further. But I could not just leave things as they were, so in
March 1983 I sent a private letter to Zhao Ziyang which broke the
deadlock and got Anglo-Chinese talks off the ground again. This went
marginally further than I had in Peking. There I had told Mr Deng that
I would be prepared to consider making recommendations to
Parliament about Hong Kong’s sovereignty if suitable arrangements
could be made to preserve its stability and prosperity. I now subtly
strengthened the formulation:
Provided that agreement could be reached between the British and Chinese
Government on administrative arrangements for Hong Kong which would
guarantee the future prosperity and stability of Hong Kong, and would be
acceptable to the British Parliament and to the people of Hong Kong as well
as to the Chinese Government, I would be prepared to recommend to
Parliament that sovereignty over the whole of Hong Kong should revert to
China, [my italics]

Geoffrey Howe and the Foreign Office wanted to go further: they
argued strongly that I should concede early in the talks that British
administration would not continue. I saw no reason to make such a
concession. I wanted to use every bargaining card we had to maximum
effect. Just how few such cards there were, however, quickly became
apparent.

There were three rounds of talks over the summer in which no
progress was made. When we took stock of the situation at a meeting
on Monday 5 September it was clear that the talks would break down
when they resumed on 22 September unless we conceded
administration as well as sovereignty to the Chinese. One particular
problem was that the timing of the talks was publicly known and it
had become the practice at the end of each session to announce the
date of the next. If the Chinese decided to hold up progress or break
off altogether it would immediately become apparent and damage
would be done to confidence in Hong Kong.
This is indeed what happened after the 22–23 September talks.
Intensified Chinese propaganda and anxiety at the absence of any
reassuring element in the official communiqué caused a massive
capital flight out of the Hong Kong dollar and a sharp fall in its value
on the foreign exchanges.
Early on Sunday morning, 25 September, I received a telephone call
from Alan Walters, who was then in Washington and had been unable
to track down either Nigel Lawson or the Governor of the Bank of
England. Alan was convinced that the only way to prevent a complete
collapse of the currency and all the serious political consequences that
entailed was to restore the currency board system — backing the Hong
Kong dollar at a par value with the United States dollar. (The Hong
Kong Government’s reserves were big enough to make this possible.)
Although I was largely convinced by Alan’s arguments and accepted
the urgent need for action, I still had some concerns — mainly
whether our exchange reserves would be put at risk. But I informed
the Treasury of what I considered was a dangerous crisis that needed
immediate defusing, and they got in touch with Nigel and the
Governor of the Bank. The following Tuesday I met Nigel, the
Governor and Alan at the Washington embassy. Although Nigel was at
first reluctant and the Governor had reservations, they eventually
agreed with me that a restoration of the currency board was the only
solution. As always this news soon leaked out to financial markets,
confidence was restored and the crisis of the Hong Kong dollar was
over. We sealed it later on 16 October 1983 by fixing the Hong Kong
dollar at an exchange rate of 7.80 Hong Kong dollars for a US dollar.
The financial press thought it was ‘an unalloyed success’. And so time
has proved it to be.
But it was also necessary to see that Anglo-Chinese talks began
again. On 14 October I sent a further message to Zhao Ziyang
expressing our willingness to explore Chinese ideas for the future of
Hong Kong and holding out the possibility of a settlement on those
lines. I had by now reluctantly decided that we would have to concede
not just sovereignty but administration to the Chinese. On 19 October
the talks were accordingly resumed.
I hoped that by pointing out in my message those aspects of the
Chinese negotiating position which might conceivably lead to as much

autonomy for and as little change in the way of life of the people of
Hong Kong as possible, we might make some progress. In November I
authorized that working papers on the legal system, financial system
and external economic relations of Hong Kong be handed over to the
Chinese. But their position hardened. They now made it clear that they
were not prepared to sign a treaty with us at all but rather to declare
‘policy objectives’ for Hong Kong themselves. By now I had abandoned
any hope of turning Hong Kong into a self-governing territory. The
overriding objective had to be to avoid a breakdown in the
negotiations, so I authorized our ambassador in Peking to spell out
more clearly the implications of my 14 October letter: that we
envisaged no link of authority or accountability between Britain and
Hong Kong after 1997. But I felt depressed.
At this time I received further advice from someone whose
experience in dealing with the Chinese I knew to be unequalled. At the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in New
Delhi I discussed our problems in dealing with the Chinese with Lee
Kuan Yew, the Prime Minister of Singapore. Unfortunately, the
discussion was interrupted on several occasions and Mr Lee
telephoned through to me his full advice later. This was that we
should send a very senior minister or emissary to convey our proposals
at the highest possible level of the Chinese Government. It was crucial,
he said, that we should adopt the right attitude — neither defiant nor
submissive, but calm and friendly. We should say clearly that the fact
was that if China did not wish Hong Kong to survive, nothing would
allow it to do so. This, of course, was precisely the point that Deng
Xiaoping had put to me in September 1982. I had managed then to
persuade him that there was an international price to be paid if he
simply took over without any regard for the prosperity and system of
Hong Kong. But I now had to accept that China’s concern for its
international good name would allow us only so much latitude. Mr
Lee’s advice therefore confirmed me in the course upon which I had
decided the previous month. The question remained: what would be
the basis of the Chinese administration? From now on we must
concentrate on the questions of autonomy and preservation of the
existing legal, economic and social system after 1997.
Whatever concessions we had to make, I was determined that the
representatives of the people of Hong Kong — the ‘unofficial’ members
of the Hong Kong Executive Council (EXCO) — should be consulted at
each crucial stage. Geoffrey Howe and I met them on the morning of
Monday 16 January 1984 at Downing Street. As always, I was struck
by their common sense and realism about the highly unpalatable
options they knew we had to consider. They basically shared our
objective, which was the highest degree of autonomy for Hong Kong
we could get backed by the best possible Chinese assurances. After this
meeting I began to think hard about how best we could give
undertakings of a right of entry to the United Kingdom to those in

Hong Kong who would be putting themselves and their families at risk
through sensitive work for the Hong Kong Government in the period
up to 1997. When I discussed the matter with ministers and officials in
July I said that we should err on the side of generosity. It must never
be said that the United Kingdom repaid loyalty with disloyalty.
The single most difficult issue which we now faced in negotiations
with the Chinese was the location of the ‘Joint Liaison Group’ which
would be established after the planned Anglo-Chinese Agreement had
been signed to make provision for the transition. I was worried that
during the transition this body would become an alternative power
centre to the Governor or, worse, that it would create the impression
of some kind of Anglo-Chinese ‘Condominium’ which would have
destroyed confidence. But I also insisted that it should continue for
three years after 1997 so as to maintain confidence after the handover
of administration had taken place. I wrote to Mr Zhao to this effect.
Geoffrey Howe had visited Peking in April and now returned in
July, accompanied by Sir Percy Cradock, and successfully reached a
compromise on the Joint Liaison Group, which would not operate in
Hong Kong before 1988. Geoffrey’s patient negotiations eventually
secured agreement. It was no triumph: but nor could it be, considering
the fact that we were dealing with an intransigent and
overwhelmingly superior power.
The terms had three main advantages. First, they constituted what
would be an unequivocally binding international agreement. Second,
they were sufficiently clear and detailed about what would happen in
Hong Kong after 1997 to command the confidence of the people of
Hong Kong. Third, there was a provision that the terms of the
proposed Anglo-Chinese Agreement would be stipulated in the Basic
Law to be passed by Chinese People’s Congress: this would in effect be
the constitution of Hong Kong after 1997.
Geoffrey was always good at the actual process of negotiation,
though we sometimes fell out as to what was possible as a result of
negotiations. In this case, though, he had shown an impressive grasp
of the issues throughout; moreover, his meeting with Mr Deng was
highly effective in reassuring the Chinese that we were to be trusted
and so paving the way for me to return to Peking to sign the Joint
Agreement. I congratulated Geoffrey in Cabinet on his return — and I
meant every word.
My visit to China in December to sign the Joint Agreement on Hong
Kong was a much less tense occasion than my visit two years earlier.
The difficult negotiations were already concluded. We had won the
support, with some reservations, of the Unofficial Members of EXCO
for the agreement. I had explained its contents to President Reagan
and won American support as well. The main purpose, therefore, of
my talks in Peking must be to strengthen the trust which the Chinese
had in our good faith as regards the management of the transition till
1997 and to reinforce in every way possible their sense of obligation

to carry through the agreement.
I arrived in Peking on the evening of Tuesday 18 December. The
official welcoming ceremony was at 9 o’clock the following morning:
at it I reviewed a Guard of Honour in Tiananmen Square, where less
than five years later the massacre of protesters took place which would
suddenly throw doubt on the carefully negotiated agreement I was
here to conclude.
The rest of the morning was spent in some two and a half hours of
talks with Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang. The mood was friendly and
relaxed: but it was clear to me that the Chinese were as concerned
about the transitional period as I was. They wanted to maintain
stability and prosperity: but they had their own ideas about how this
should be done. I emphasized that it all came down to the drafting of
the Basic Law. It must be suited to the capitalist system and consistent
with the Hong Kong legal system. I stressed how important it was that
China had expressed willingness to solicit opinions from a wide range
of people within Hong Kong. I then broached what I knew would be
an even more sensitive topic. I said that the Chinese would be aware
of our proposals for the constitutional development of Hong Kong —
essentially strengthening in a modest way democracy and autonomy,
though I was careful not to use these words. Mr Zhao answered that
the Chinese Government was not prepared to make any comment on
constitutional development in the transitional period. In principle, the
Chinese too wanted more Hong Kong people involved in the
administration. But that process must not adversely affect stability and
prosperity or the smooth transfer of government in 1997. I left it at
that; it was as far as I felt it was prudent to go at this meeting.
In the afternoon I talked to the Chinese Communist Party General
Secretary, Hu Yaobang, whose influence I had been told was greater
than some outside observers thought. I had earlier met the diminutive
Mr Hu when he visited London. He was widely considered — perhaps
too widely for his own interests as it turned out — to be Deng
Xiaoping’s preferred successor and was known as a reformist. I had
said quite openly to him in London that many of us hoped that those
like him who had lived through the Cultural Revolution would bring a
new approach to China’s affairs. He went on to tell me, with tears in
his eyes, about the suffering he personally had endured at this time. It
would be nice to believe that he could understand at least some of my
worries about Hong Kong’s future: but perhaps human nature is not
quite that simple.
I then went on to the crucial meeting with Deng Xiaoping. The most
important immediate guarantee of Hong Kong’s future was Mr Deng’s
goodwill. I told him that the ‘stroke of genius’ in the negotiations had
been his concept of ‘one country, two systems’. He, with becoming
modesty, attributed the credit for this to Marxist historical dialectics,
or to use what appeared to be the appropriate slogan, ’seeking truth
from the facts’. Apparently, the concept of ‘one country, two systems’

had been devised originally from Chinese proposals of 1980 for
dealing with Taiwan. (In fact, it proved a good deal more appropriate
for Hong Kong: the Taiwanese attitude was clearly ‘one country, one
system — ours’ — and given their economic success and their move to
democracy, I can see their point.)
The Chinese had set out in the agreement a fifty-year period after
1997 for its duration. I was intrigued by this and asked why fifty
years. Mr Deng said that China hoped to approach the economic level
of advanced countries by the end of that time. If China wanted to
develop herself, she had to be open to the outside world for the whole
of that period. The maintenance of Hong Kong’s stability and
prosperity accorded with China’s interest in modernizing its economy.
This did not mean that in fifty years China would be a capitalist
country. Far from it. He said that the one billion Chinese on the
mainland would pursue socialism firmly. If Taiwan and Hong Kong
practised capitalism that would not affect the socialist orientation of
the bulk of the country. Indeed the practice of capitalism in some
small areas would benefit socialism. (Since then, it has become clear
that Chinese socialism is whatever the Chinese Government does; and
what it has been doing amounts to a thorough-going embrace of
capitalism. In economic policy, at least, Mr Deng has indeed sought
truth from facts.)
I found his analysis basically reassuring, if not persuasive. It was
reassuring because it suggested that the Chinese would for their own
self-interest seek to keep Hong Kong prosperous. It was unpersuasive
for quite different reasons. The Chinese belief that the benefits of a
liberal economic system can be had without a liberal political system
seems to me false in the long term. Of course, culture and character
affect the way in which economic and political systems work in
particular countries. The crackdown after the Tiananmen Square
massacre in June 1989 convinced many outside observers that in
China political and economic liberty were not interdependent.
Certainly, after those terrible events we reassessed what needed to be
done to secure Hong Kong’s future. I was reinforced in my
determination to honour Britain’s obligations to those on whom British
administration and Hong Kong’s prosperity depended up to 1997. In
any case, I always felt Britain would benefit economically from
talented, entrepreneurial Hong Kong people coming here.
So in 1990 we legislated to give British citizenship to 50,000 key
people in the Colony and their dependants — though the essential
purpose of the scheme was to provide sufficient reassurance to
persuade them to stay at their posts in Hong Kong where they were
vitally needed. We were also brought under strong pressure
immediately to accelerate the process of democratization in Hong
Kong. There were, in any case, strong moral arguments for doing so.
But all my instincts told me that this was the wrong time. The Chinese
leadership was feeling acutely apprehensive. Such a step at that

moment could have provoked a strong defensive reaction that might
have undermined the Hong Kong Agreement. We needed to wait for
calmer times before considering moves towards democratization
within the scope of the agreement.
If it was China’s recognition that she could benefit from extending
the notion of ‘one country, two systems’ to Hong Kong which allowed
the Hong Kong Agreement to be reached, something more would be
needed in the long term. At some point the increasing momentum of
economic change in China itself will lead to political change. Keeping
open the channels of trade and communication, while firmly pressing
for human rights in China to be upheld, are the best means of ensuring
that this great military power, on the verge of becoming a great
economic power, becomes also a reliable and predictable member of
the international community.
Japan
Japan is not only a great economic power and a leading democratic
nation in the region, but of great importance to Hong Kong. The
confidence of Hong Kong is much affected by the confidence of
Japanese investors there, who also regard it as the gateway to
mainland China. For reasons of wartime history, the Japanese were
shy of making public statements about China. But they had close
contacts with and a deep insight into what was happening there. So I
always sounded out Japanese politicians on their impressions of
thinking in Peking.
However, the main subject of (often difficult) negotiations with the
Japanese during my time as Prime Minister was trade. We pressed the
Japanese to open up their markets to our goods, to liberalize their
financial and retail distribution systems and to work towards the
reduction of their huge and destabilizing balance of trade surpluses
with the West.
Much of the criticism of the Japanese was unfair. They were
everybody’s scapegoat. The Japanese should not have been blamed for
prudently saving more — and so having more to invest at home,
overseas or, indeed, financing the US budget deficit. Nor should the
Japanese have been blamed for producing first-class cars, cheaper
video recorders and advanced cameras, bought eagerly by western
consumers. Yet in both cases they were.
Far more important was to ensure that their markets should be as
open to our goods as ours were to theirs. In fact, in addition to tariffs,
which of course were subject to GATT regulations, there were two big
obstacles. The first was that their distribution system was inefficient,
fragmented and overmanned and their administrative system was
difficult to get around. The second was a cultural difference. For
example, Japanese consumers automatically prefer to buy home-

produced goods: government action can do little to change that. More
potentially amenable to international pressure was that the Japanese
offered terms of aid which we could not match and so secured foreign
contracts.
The Japanese have also regularly been pilloried by western
governments for not taking a more active international role in
upholding security when we — and even more so Japan’s immediate
East Asian neighbours — would not wish Japan to rearm and act as a
great or even a regional power. As was shown in the Gulf War, Japan
is increasingly willing to pay for others, particularly the United States,
to uphold international order and security. The fact that, in both the
economic and security fields, much western criticism of Japan is unfair
does not, however, mean that we should be anything other than
tough-minded and realistic in dealing with Japan. But the Japanese
must also be treated with genuine (and deserved) respect and their
own sensitivities understood.
My second visit to Japan was in the autumn of 1982 on my way to
China and Hong Kong. It set something of a pattern. I stressed to my
hosts — both politicians and businessmen — my concern at the
difficulty which British companies faced in penetrating Japanese
markets. The Japanese themselves had promised action to deal with
this, but it was a long time in taking effect. There were, though, more
positive elements to the visit. I met members of the Keidanren — the
Japanese CBI — and was struck by the fact that the top Japanese
industrialists I encountered seemed often to be engineers, people with
a practical understanding of the manufacturing processes of their firms
and able to contribute to innovation. This was in marked contrast to
Britain where, all too often, ‘management’ seemed to be qualified in
administration and accountancy. It was, I thought, a clue to Japanese
industrial success.
While in Japan I met the President of Nissan, whose company was
considering at that time whether to go ahead with the construction of
the plant it eventually built in Sunderland. We had a useful talk,
though I could not at this stage draw from him any explicit
commitment. Negotiations were at first known only to a small group.
But agreement was finally reached in January 1984. I was convinced
that the Nissan project made as much sense for Japan as it did for us.
By exporting investment to Britain they would undercut protectionist
pressures against them, bring in income for years ahead as well, of
course, as providing incomes and jobs in the recipient country.
During my visit I also went to the Tsukuba Science City. This was
fascinating. But I thought the decision to concentrate scientists in one
particular location away from the great industrial centres was
questionable. Interestingly, I found a number of Japanese who shared
that view. This is all the more important because Japan’s research is
often on the technological side, whereas, by contrast, Britain’s
emphasis is on basic science. (Most of Japan’s advances in industry

have come from the application of well-established scientific
principles.)
At this time the export of Japanese machine tools to the West was
one of the most vexed issues of dispute. At Tsukuba I saw just how
advanced the Japanese were. I was photographed shaking hands with
a robot and, to my astonishment, found that it even had smooth,
delicately jointed fingers. It was a demonstration that the Japanese not
only had advanced electronics: they had managed to develop and
apply that technology far more successfully than we had.
Under Prime Minister Nakasone, Japan began to play a more active
role in international affairs. So, when he made a visit to Britain in
June 1984, I felt that I was dealing with a Japanese leader who
understood and sympathized with western values and had shown that
he was prepared to make steps in the right direction on economic
policy. The talks I had with him in the morning and over lunch on
Monday 11 June 1984 could, therefore, concentrate as much on wider
international issues as on Anglo-Japanese bilateral trade disputes. Mr
Nakasone gave me an account of his dealings with the Chinese. I told
him about the state of our negotiations on Hong Kong. This was, of
course, nearing the end of that period of freeze in the Cold War which
preceded the advent of Mr Gorbachev. Mr Nakasone showed a shrewd
understanding of what Japan’s role in these circumstances should be.
He said that the Soviets would come out of their hibernation only
when they decided to do so and that the West should wait for this. But
he had continued to urge on the USSR the need for dialogue. He
believed that the Soviets would need Japanese expertise and capital to
develop Siberia and that this would in the long run be a powerful
influence. In fact, this accurate and imaginative approach, which could
yield enormous benefits, has still not been applied, mainly because of
the dispute between (now) Russia and Japan over the Kurile Islands. I
also discussed with Mr Nakasone Japanese investment in Britain. He
said that half of the Japanese companies now established within the
European Community were in the United Kingdom. ‘Not enough,’ I
replied. ‘I would like two dozen more.’ He went away in no doubt
about the welcome Britain would accord to Japanese investment.
My next visit to Tokyo was for the G7 economic summit in May
1986. The main issues at the summit were not economic at all but
rather political. In the wake of the US-Libyan raid, international
terrorism was the principal item on the agenda. The appalling
consequences of the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl were also still being
assessed and discussed. On terrorism I was determined to support the
Americans with a strong statement in the communiqué. I was glad to
learn from President Reagan when I saw him in Tokyo on the
afternoon of Sunday 4 May, on the eve of the summit, that he could go
along with what I proposed.
Both President Reagan and I were keen that the summit should be a
success for the Japanese. The President was a strong supporter of

Prime Minister Nakasone and was rather more inclined to be
optimistic about the changes which had been promised in Japan’s
economic practices than I was. But I had to agree with him that Mr
Nakasone had the right instincts in international affairs and it was
important not to endanger his position.
In fact, there was not much practically to show for the vigorous
efforts we had made to have the Japanese open up their markets.
There was, for example, still heavy discriminatory tax on imported
liquor. Whisky was the fourth largest single UK export to Japan. This
being my own favourite nightcap, I felt a truly proselytizing zeal to
encourage the taste for it. The former Governor of the Bank of Japan,
Mr Maekawa, had also produced a report on ways to reform the
Japanese financial and commercial system so as to allow the reduction
of Japan’s huge trade surplus. But it was better on generalities than
specifics.
Japan’s trade surplus was sharply up again in 1986. But the
Japanese had allowed the yen to rise in value, something which was
far from popular among Japanese industrialists, and this would
probably be the most important factor towards achieving a better
balance of international trade relations in the future. The other good
news from our point of view was that by now forty Japanese
manufacturing companies were operating in the UK, creating over
10,000 jobs; and the Nissan plant was expected to start full-scale
production that summer with total employment of around 3,000
people. On the cultural level, contacts between our two countries were
good. The Japanese had begun a policy of endowing teaching posts at
British universities. The eldest son of the Crown Prince of Japan had
recently completed two years at Oxford University. Our own Prince
and Princess of Wales were due, in turn, to visit Japan.
I talked to Mr Nakasone shortly after the end of the summit. After
congratulating him on the organization — which was far better than
the previous Tokyo summit I had attended — and discussing the
inevitable subject of Scotch whisky, I said that I wanted to try to
ensure that in future relations between Britain and Japan were not
dominated by the trade imbalance. That was still not possible at the
moment. Some sizeable purchases by the Japanese of aircraft would
help. But I was clear in my own mind that we must get beyond these
issues to those of wider international importance if Japan was to play
her proper role in world affairs.
Japanese politics are sui generis. Leaders ‘emerge’ from negotiations
between factions. Decisions are taken through gradually developed
consensus rather than debate. And in spite of his achievements in
establishing Japan as a major player on the international stage, Mr
Nakasone was unable to buck the convention by which the nominees
of other factions in the governing Japanese Liberal Democratic Party
(LDP) must have their turn in office.

It was his successor, Mr Takeshita, as head of the largest faction in
the LDP, who took the most important decisions to make structural
changes in the Japanese economy. Of most importance from our point
of view, it was he who removed the discrimination against Scotch
whisky and opened up the Japanese Stock Exchange to two of the
best-known British stockbrokers who had been excluded. I said to Mr
Takeshita when he came to London to see me that he was the fourth
Prime Minister with whom I had raised the issue of the Stock
Exchange. He promised action but asked for time. And he proved as
good as his word. I did not have to raise it with a fifth. Partly as a
result, however, of public resentment at the introduction of a new,
though modest consumption tax and partly as a result of political
scandal, Mr Takeshita resigned in May 1989. His successor, Mr Uno,
after just a few months in office, soon resigned too. So it was the
comparatively young and relatively unknown Prime Minister Toshiki
Kaifu who was in office when I made what turned out to be my last
visit to Japan as Prime Minister in September 1989.
Mr Kaifu was to host a meeting of the International Democratic
Union (IDU) — the international organization of Conservative Parties
which Ronald Reagan and I had founded. Inevitably, the IDU
comprised a variety of right-of-centre parties: but it had the advantage
over its junior partner, the European Democratic Union (EDU), that it
was not dominated by the Christian Democrats and included the
American Republican Party. (The star of that year’s conference was
undoubtedly the Swedish Conservative leader — since Prime Minister
— who delivered a speech of such startling Thatcherite soundness that
in applauding I felt as if I was giving myself a standing ovation.)
Mr Kaifu had his own domestic reasons for wanting the occasion to
be a success. He had no strong power base of his own within the LDP
and needed to cut something of an international figure in order to win
back alienated LDP voters before the forthcoming general election. For
my part I wanted to help him as much as I could. He was strongly prowestern, a man of integrity, and not at all in the somewhat reticent,
introverted mould of some Japanese politicians that I met. I had not
really got to know Mr Kaifu before I came to Japan — though he had
been to see me at No. 10 as part of a group on previous occasions. I
was told that his favourite sayings were: ‘politics begins with sincerity’
and ‘perseverance leads to success.’ It seemed an uncontroversial
philosophy.
I had a long talk with Prime Minister Kaifu on the afternoon of
Wednesday 20 September. Some of the worst causes of disagreement
between Japan and the West, including Britain, were by now being
overcome. Japan’s external surplus had begun to fall somewhat —
though the fact that the yen had depreciated against the dollar
threatened problems with the Americans in the future. Japanese
investment in Britain was now greater than ever: in fact we were
attracting more Japanese manufacturing investment than anywhere

else in the European Community. Japan had become one of Britain’s
fastest growing major markets. My discussions with the Prime Minister
covered that perennial topic, Scotch whisky — where the ever
ingenious Japanese had devised whisky ‘lookalikes’ to circumvent the
tax changes which had been introduced.
But we were also able to range much more widely over international
and indeed Japanese domestic affairs. Mr Kaifu had twice been
Education minister and so we had something special in common. He
spoke eloquently about social issues, in particular the decline of the
family and the need to come to terms with the demographic factor of a
rapidly ageing population. These were matters which were also
increasingly preoccupying me. But I felt that Japan’s highly developed
sense of community and ability to combine material progress with an
attachment to traditional values in some ways equipped them better to
face these challenges than did our western culture. I have always
connected this with the fact that Japan has the lowest level of violent
crime in the developed world.
At the end of our talk I gave a television interview jointly with Mr
Kaifu about global environmental issues, an area in which the
Japanese were beginning to play a large role. I hoped that it would
boost his standing, and was told that it had done so. But after the
customary two years, Mr Kaifu was soon in his turn to join the ranks
of former Japanese prime ministers whose international achievements
were an insufficient antidote for factional weakness.
By the time I left office, the West and Japan were beginning
seriously to come to terms with the question of where Japan’s future
lay. Only with the end of the Cold War has the full importance of this
become apparent. Japan can have a huge role in bringing Russia to
prosperity and stability by providing the capital and technology for
the development of Siberia. At the same time, Japan has very close
links with China. Japan’s attitude to East Asia, where newly
industrialized countries’ economies are racing ahead, is also of great
importance in determining whether the dominant approach will be
one of free trade or protection. Above all, relations between the United
States and Japan are vital to the security of the region, and indeed on
a global scale too, where Japan has the resources and America the
technology — and enjoys the trust — to support any kind of ‘new
world order’.
East Asia and Australia
British policy ‘East of Suez’ still matters. Indeed, there is a strong
argument that it will matter more and more. East Asia contains some
of the fastest growing economies in the world. The newly
industrialized countries of the Asian Pacific region, like South Korea,
Taiwan, Indonesia and Singapore — which, together with Hong Kong,
make up the five ‘little tigers’ — have to be fully integrated into a

global free-trading economy if our industries are to compete
effectively. They will increasingly provide us not just with competition
but markets. They would all welcome more European — particularly
British — contact as a counterweight to the other dominant influences
in the region — the United States, China and Japan. In the longer term
it is still unclear if and when countries like (an eventually reunited)
Korea and Indonesia (with the world’s fourth largest population — and
the largest Muslim country) will develop wider political ambitions.
Britain has a traditional presence in the region. Australia should also
now be considered at least as much a power in its own right as a
partner in the Anglo-Saxon world. Individually and through the
Commonwealth, Britain and Australia have an interest in nudging
political development in the direction of democracy. So for all these
reasons I was keen to visit the region so as to exert influence and drum
up business for British companies.
I had had to postpone my visit to South-East Asia because of the
miners’ strike. This put out some of the initial arrangements. So when
I eventually departed on the morning of Thursday 4 April 1985 it was
with a schedule originally devised for a fortnight but telescoped into
ten days.
The first leg of the tour was Malaysia. We ought to have had better
relations with Malaysia than we actually did. This was in part because
the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dr Mahathir, felt that in the past we
had not treated his country with sufficient respect as an independent
nation. It may not have been just chance that Britain always seemed to
be at the bottom of the list when bids for contracts in Malaysia were
considered. In fact, I got on rather well with Dr Mahathir and
developed an increasing respect for him. He was tough, shrewd and
practical. He had a refreshingly matter-of-fact outlook on everything
that related to his country. Several years later, when, almost
overnight, environmental issues had become all the rage in
international gatherings, he put down some of the more extreme
conservationists by saying that he was not prepared to keep tribesmen
in his country living under conditions which promised a life
expectancy of about forty-five simply in order to allow them to be
studied by academics.
When I left Malaysia I felt that Dr Mahathir and I had established a
good understanding, and so indeed it proved. When I first arrived he
had been highly critical of the Commonwealth, seeing it as a kind of
post-colonial institution. But I persuaded him to come to the next
CHOGM. I had made a convert. Indeed in 1989, he himself hosted the
CHOGM in Kuala Lumpur. It turned out to be the best organized I ever
attended. Slightly less diplomatically beneficial were my talks with the
very cultured, sophisticated earlier Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tunku
Abdul Rahman. We found ourselves, as so often seemed the case in
Commonwealth countries, discussing South Africa. I remarked that it
would have been better if we had kept South Africa inside the

Commonwealth, where we could have influenced her more effectively.
Tunku Abdul Rahman looked surprisingly displeased. I soon learnt
why. He told me that he had been principally responsible for throwing
South Africa out in the first place. Clang.
From Malaysia I went, via Singapore and Brunei, to Indonesia.
Everything about Indonesia is remarkable. A state created out of some
17,000 islands, a mix of races and religions, based on an artificially
created philosophy — the five principles of ‘Pancasila’ — it is a marvel
that Indonesia has been kept together at all. Yet it has an economy
which is growing fast, more or less sound public finances, and though
there have been serious human rights abuses, particularly in East
Timor, this is a society which by most criteria ‘works’. At the top,
President Soeharto is an immensely hard-working and effective ruler. I
was struck by the detailed interest he took in agriculture — something
which is all too rare in oil-rich countries like Indonesia. He spent
hours on his own farm where experiments in cross-breeding livestock
to maximize nutrition were the order of the day. The architect of the
technological and industrial base of Indonesia was Dr Habibie, a
German-trained scientist of immense energy and imagination.
It was on the final day of my stay in Indonesia that I first realized
that I had become an internationally known figure — and not just in
Europe, the scene of so many bitter arguments, or in the United States,
where I always received a warm reception, but in parts of the world
entirely foreign to me. I flew up to Bandung to inspect Dr Habibie’s
excellent Institute of Technology. As I got off the aeroplane I was met
by girls throwing rose petals on the ground in front of me and then all
the way from the airport by crowds five to six deep along the roadside
crying ‘Tacher, Tacher’.
Later that day I arrived in Colombo, Sri Lanka. President
Jayewardene I already knew and had liked at once. He was an elderly,
distinguished lawyer of great integrity and someone who peppered his
speech, as I am inclined to do, with talk of ‘the rule of law’, not a bad
refrain for any politician. At this time he was beginning to be faced by
Tamil terrorism, which ultimately Sri Lanka alone was not able to
suppress. He explained to me in the car the various concessions he had
made for regional autonomy — Sri Lanka is a relatively modern
construct and real unification of Ceylon came only in the 1830s. I
judged that if anyone could restore peace and order without largescale violence it was such a man as this.
Early the following morning I set off for the opening ceremony of
the Victoria Dam Power Station, which as I have explained earlier,*
was largely paid for out of British Overseas Aid. Although it was still
before 10 o’clock in the morning and we were well up in the hills, the
heat was almost unbearable. First, I visited the power station and dam.
Then there was a long march past of children in different costumes;
dances were performed; flowers were thrown. The Sri Lankan minister
with me made his speech. By now we were under a large awning and

it was with relief that I saw that someone had brought him a glass of
water. Then it was my turn to speak. But no water. By now the
atmosphere was even more stifling. I was glad to get back in the car to
be driven on to Kandy. The President came with me. But for some
reason I still couldn’t get any water. Nearly five hours after leaving
Colombo I reached the government guesthouse and I at last got my
glass of water. I gulped it gratefully.
Next day I was due to address the Sri Lankan Parliament. It is easy
to imagine my horror when, having been introduced by the Speaker, I
looked around and found… no water. The Parliament building is
magnificent inside and out: but it is also excessively air-conditioned
and the atmosphere is dry as dust. Part of the way through my speech
I had such a fit of coughing that I had to stop and wait until a glass of
water was found for me. I had learnt my lesson. From now on a crate
of fizzy Ashbourne water would accompany me on my travels.
I returned to Britain by way of India where I met Rajiv Gandhi for
the first time since he had become Prime Minister after his mother’s
assassination. (At this stage I was on good terms with him: it was only
later that year at the CHOGM in Nassau that we fell out over South
Africa.) My abiding impression was of the tight security which
surrounded him and his wife Sonia. They were living in a small, rather
cramped house, unwilling or unable to return to the house where Mrs
Gandhi had met her death. I laid a wreath at the site of my old friend’s
funeral pyre.
I was due to attend the Bicentennial celebration in Australia in the
late summer of 1988. I had really rather doubted whether my presence
was necessary at all. I had earlier suggested to the Australian Prime
Minister, Bob Hawke, that, with the Queen, other members of the
Royal Family and numerous foreign dignitaries, perhaps I would be
one Englishwoman too many. But he insisted that I should come, and
so I did. Although I had some famous rows with Bob Hawke, I found
him easy to deal with: like me, he was blunt and direct. But on this
occasion, he was to prove consideration itself.
I had decided to combine this Australian visit with another foray
into South-East Asia. On this occasion I was able to spend rather
longer than previously in Singapore. That little island’s economy
continued to astonish. Its GDP was rising at over 9 per cent a year and
its total trade was up over the same period by a third. It was therefore
pleasant to receive congratulations from Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew
about the state of the British economy, though I said that in my view
we were growing somewhat too fast. His only criticism was of me
personally — for undertaking a programme of foreign visits which he
described as ‘absolute madness’, adding that he did not know anyone
else who would even contemplate it. He was full of his usual shrewd
observations about world trouble spots like Cambodia, North Korea
and the Middle East. I always found him most perceptive about China.
He maintained that although entrenched habits in China were deeply

authoritarian, communism itself went against the grain of the Chinese
character and could not in the very long term succeed. Lee Kuan Yew
is of course by origin Chinese himself: I used to tell him that in many
ways I wished he had stayed at home — that way China might have
found its way to capitalism twenty years earlier.
Then it was on to Australia. I arrived in Perth, went on to Alice
Springs, and arrived at Canberra. Here I visited the new Parliament
building, erected to celebrate the Bicentennial, and was met by Bob
Hawke, who introduced me to his Cabinet, in which Paul Keating was
then Finance minister. Whatever differences of outlook we had on
other matters, I found Mr Keating refreshingly orthodox on finance —
a far cry from the British Labour Party. In my speech at the lunch
which followed I stressed the importance of Australia’s role as a
regional power. The fact was that the economic growth of many
countries in the area was going ahead far faster than political progress.
I believed that Australia, as one of the world’s oldest and most
developed democracies, could make a vital contribution to regional
stability.
My tour finished up in Brisbane. I visited the British Pavilion at the
EXPO ’88 World Trade Fair. I was disappointed by what I saw and said
so with some vigour on my return to England. It was not the fault of
those directly concerned, but rather of cheese-paring by the British
Government, that our pavilion just did not match those of other major
countries. As with embassy buildings, I always insisted that cutting
back on expenditure on generating the right image of Britain abroad is
sheer foolishness. From now on I took a direct interest in the matter:
for example, I told David Young, as Trade and Industry Secretary, that
we must have the best national exhibition at the Seville EXPO in 1992,
and I believe we did.
My day ended in Brisbane with attendance at a splendid production
of the ‘Last Night of the Proms’ — which the Australians immediately
christened the ‘Last Night of the Poms’. Whatever the shortcomings of
the pavilion, British popular culture was on vigorous form.
From Australia I flew via Malaysia to Thailand. It was my first visit.
But I soon found myself in much the same frame of mind as at
Brisbane, for it was clear that our large and impressive embassy
building in Bangkok was not being properly maintained. Next morning
I visited the United Nations Refugee Camp on the Thai border with
Cambodia. It was quite a trip to get there — aeroplane, then
helicopter, then Land Rover. It was huge, more like a large town than
a temporary camp. Prince Sihanouk, his wife and daughter were in
charge. I quickly noticed that there were very few men: it turned out
that the great majority were away fighting the Vietnamese Army
inside Cambodia. I also noticed immediately how the refugees
venerated Prince Sihanouk, approaching him, as is the — for a
westerner — rather disturbing habit, on their knees. He delivered a
rousing and justified philippic against Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge

while I was there. Later I detected in conversation with him that
wiliness and toughness which accounted, against all odds and
predictions, for his political survival in a very dangerous game.
I had worn a simple cotton dress and flat shoes to visit the refugee
camp. But I was struck by the fact that many of the women there were
wearing attractive new dresses, looking remarkably elegant. My hair
had also suffered from the wind, heat and humidity. So when I
returned to Bangkok I asked the embassy to find someone who would
set it for me and was pleasantly surprised to find myself in the hands
of a lady whom I still consider to be one of best hairdressers I have
ever had.
It is easy to fall in love with Thailand, in spite of its seamy side
which was kept well hidden from me. As a staunch monarchist myself,
I was particularly moved by my discussions with the King and Queen
of Thailand. Perhaps every national monarchy has to find its own
particular style. Certainly, King Bhumibol Adulyadej had done so.
Hearing him speak with equal passion about problems of peasant
agriculture and matters of high politics I could well understand the
unique regard in which the Thai monarchy was held and how, though
generals and civilian governments might come and go, the monarchy
itself had remained the enduring source of legitimacy.
I returned to Britain by way of Dubai and took the opportunity of
visiting HMS Manchester, acting as part of the Armilla Patrol
protecting shipping in the Gulf. I do not really enjoy the heat: but at
least I thought I would never experience anything worse than the
temperature overlooking Sri Lanka’s Victoria Dam Power Project three
years earlier. I was wrong. It was over 120 degrees as Denis and I
stood waiting on the tarmac for the helicopter to take us from Dubai
Airport aboard HMS Manchester. I was fascinated to explore the ship,
climbing up and down ladders and along the narrow gangways from
the galley to the Sea Dart missile loading bay. I stayed longest in the
Operations Room. It did not take much imagination to envisage how
easily mistakes can be made, in spite of all the checks and double
checks, under great tension, in that darkened enclosed space. Below
decks it was slightly cooler, though not much. The Chief Cook who
was baking an apple and blackcurrant pie told me that the
temperature in the galley was 105 degrees. I decided that it was time
for this particular politician to ‘get out of the kitchen’ and left. I had
enjoyed myself. But that iced whisky and soda back aboard the VC10
never tasted better.
THE MIDDLE EAST
Egypt and Jordan

Little progress was made during my time as Prime Minister in solving
the Arab-Israeli dispute. It is important, though, to be clear about what
such a ‘solution’ can and cannot be. The likelihood of a total change of
heart among those concerned is minimal. Nor will outside influences
ever be entirely removed from the region. Certainly, the end of Soviet
communist manipulation of disputed issues makes it potentially easier
to reach agreement with moderate Arabs and allows the United States
to place clearer limits on its support for particular Israeli policies. But
ultimately the United States, which was the power most responsible
for the establishment of the state of Israel, will and must always stand
behind Israel’s security. It is equally, though, right that the
Palestinians should be restored in their land and dignity: and, as often
happens in my experience, what is morally right eventually turns out
to be politically expedient. Removing, even in limited measure, the
Palestinian grievance is a necessary if not sufficient condition for
cutting the cancer of Middle East terrorism out by the roots. The only
way this can happen, as has long been clear, is for Israel to exchange
‘land for peace’, returning occupied territories to the Palestinians in
exchange for credible undertakings to respect Israel’s security. It may
be that the (thankfully ineffective) scud missile attacks of the Gulf
War, demonstrating that Israel cannot preserve her security just by
enlarging her borders, will eventually pave the way for such a
compromise. That is to anticipate: for during my time as Prime
Minister all initiatives eventually foundered on the fact that the two
sides ultimately saw no need to adjust their stance. But that did not
mean that we could simply sit back and let events take their course.
Initiatives at least offered hope: stagnation in the Middle East peace
process only ever promised disaster.
In September 1985 I visited the two key moderate Arab states, Egypt
and Jordan. President Mubarak of Egypt had continued to pursue,
though with greater circumspection, the policies of his assassinated
predecessor, Anwar Sadat. King Hussein of Jordan had put forward a
proposal for an international peace conference, as a prelude to which
US Ambassador Murphy was to meet a joint Jordanian-Palestinian
delegation. The Egyptians were keen to see the Jordanian initiative
succeed. But the sticking point was which Palestinian representatives
would be acceptable to the Americans, who would have nothing
directly to do with the PLO. President Mubarak felt that the Americans
were not being sufficiently positive. I had some sympathy for this
point of view, though I restated what I said was a cardinal principle
for the US, as for Britain, that we would not agree to talks with those
who practised terrorism. I felt that President Mubarak and I
understood one another. He was a large personality, persuasive and
direct — the sort of man who could be one of the key players in a
settlement.
My main public gesture in Egypt on behalf of British business was
the unromantic one of opening the British-built Cairo Waste Water

Project, in effect the city’s sewer. But before leaving Egypt I made the
statutory — though no less fascinating — tour of Karnak and Luxor. It
was very hot. By this time I had learned my lesson: I had my own
bottled mineral water with me in the car. But a minor disaster ensued
when my staff, credulously believing that a bottle labelled mineral
water at the museum actually contained such a thing, promptly all
went down with severe stomach upsets. I suspect that they were even
more pleased than I was when we arrived that evening (Wednesday 18
September) at Amman.
I already knew King Hussein well and liked him. He had come to see
me in Downing Street on a number of occasions. Like President
Mubarak, but more so, King Hussein was vexed with the Americans,
believing that, having encouraged him to take a peace initiative, they
were now drawing back under domestic Jewish pressure. I understood
what he felt. He had been taking a real risk in trying to promote his
initiative and I thought he deserved more support. I wanted to do
what I could to help. So when the King told me that two leading PLO
supporters would be prepared publicly to renounce terrorism and
accept UNSCR 242 I said that if they would do this, I would meet them
in London. I announced this at my press conference. It would have
been the first meeting between a British minister and representatives
of the PLO. Later, when they arrived in London, I checked to see if
they were still prepared to adhere to these conditions. One did. But the
other could not: he was afraid for his life. So I could not see them. I
am glad to say that King Hussein supported me in that decision. But it
demonstrated — if that was necessary — how treacherous these waters
were.
Before leaving Jordan I was taken out to see a Palestinian refugee
camp. Denis used to say to me that these camps always tore his heart
out. This was no exception. It was clean, well organized, orderly —
and utterly hopeless. It was in effect run by the PLO who had, of
course, a vested interest in making such camps a permanent recruiting
ground for their revolutionary struggle. The most talented and
educated Palestinians would not remain long there, preferring to join
the Palestinian diaspora all over the Arab world. I talked to one old
lady, half blind, lying in the shade of a tree outside her family’s hut.
She was said to be about 100. But she had one thing above all on her
mind, and spoke about it: the restoration of the Palestinians’ rights.
Israel
I had been to Israel several times before I became Prime Minister; and
each time I visited what for the world’s three great religions is ‘the
Holy Land’ it made an indelible impression. Anyone who has been to
Jerusalem will understand why General Allenby, on taking the city
from the Turks, dismounted to enter it on foot, as a mark of respect.

I have enormous admiration for the Jewish people, inside or outside
Israel. There have always been Jewish members of my staff and indeed
my Cabinet. In fact I just wanted a Cabinet of clever, energetic people
— and frequently that turned out to be the same thing. My old
constituency of Finchley has a large Jewish population. In the thirtythree years I represented it I never had a Jew come in poverty and
desperation to one of my constituency surgeries. They had always
been looked after by their own community.
I believe in what are often referred to as ‘Judaeo-Christian’ values:
indeed my whole political philosophy is based on them. But I have
always been wary of falling into the trap of equating in some way the
Jewish and Christian faiths. I do not, as a Christian, believe that the
Old Testament — the history of the Law — can be fully understood
without the New Testament — the history of Mercy. But I often wished
that Christian leaders would take a leaf out of the teaching of Britain’s
wonderful former Chief Rabbi, Immanuel Jakobovits, and indeed that
Christians themselves would take closer note of the Jewish emphasis
on self-help and acceptance of personal responsibility. On top of all
that, the political and economic construction of Israel against huge
odds and bitter adversaries is one of the heroic sagas of our age. They
really made ‘the desert bloom’. I only wished that Israeli emphasis on
the human rights of the Russian refuseniks was matched by proper
appreciation of the plight of landless and stateless Palestinians.
The Israelis knew when I arrived in their country in May 1986 that
they were dealing with someone who harboured no lurking hostility
towards them, who understood their anxieties, but who was not going
to pursue an unqualified Zionist approach. Above all, I could be
assured of respect for having stood up to terrorism at home and
abroad. (It was only a matter of weeks since I had been one of the very
few to support the American raid on Libya.) The Israelis were also
aware of the tough line we were taking with the Syrians about the
attempt of Nezar Hindawi, who had clear links to the Syrian Embassy
and Government, to place a bomb on an El Al aircraft at Heathrow. So
if anyone was in a good position to speak some home truths without
too much fear of being misunderstood it was I.
I was looking forward to seeing Prime Minister Shimon Peres again.
I knew him to be sincere, intelligent and reasonable. I had met him
many times. It was a great pity that he would shortly, under the
arrangement reached with the Likud Party in the national coalition,
hand over the premiership to the hardline Yitzhak Shamir. Both Mr
Peres and I wondered in the light of past history how people would
react to seeing the Union Jack and the Star of David flying side by
side. But we need not have worried. I arrived to be greeted by
welcoming crowds at Tel Aviv, and was driven up to Jerusalem to stay
at the King David Hotel — so full of associations for me and for all
British people.* Outside the hotel even larger crowds were cheering in
the darkness. I insisted on getting out of the car to see them, which

threw the security men into a fit of agitation. But it was worth it: the
people were delighted.
I breakfasted the following morning with Teddy Kollek, the Mayor
of Jerusalem. I knew him well: he combined a warm humanity with
formidable administrative zeal and — a still more valuable
combination — loyalty to his own people with a sympathetic
understanding of the problems of the Arabs. The whole day — Sunday
25 May — was full of evocative demonstrations of Israel’s history and
identity. Naturally, I attended the Yad Vashem Memorial to the
Holocaust: as on every occasion, I came out numb with shock that
human beings could sink to such depravity.
I went on to a meeting with Mr Shamir. It was impossible to imagine
anyone more different from Shimon Peres. This was a hard man,
though undoubtedly a man of principle, whose past had left scars on
his personality. There was no hostility between us: but nor could there
ultimately be any meeting of minds about the way forward. It was
clear that there was no possibility of Mr Shamir himself giving up
‘land for peace’ and the Jewish settlements on the West Bank would
continue to go ahead.
I believed that the real challenge was to strengthen moderate
Palestinians, probably in association with Jordan, who would
eventually push aside the PLO extremists. But this would never happen
if Israel did not encourage it; and the miserable conditions under
which Arabs on the West Bank and in Gaza were having to live only
made things worse. I also believed that there should be local elections
on the West Bank. But at that time one of the strongest opponents of
concessions on this — or anything else it seemed — was the then
Defence minister, Mr Rabin, with whom I had breakfast on Monday.
He proceeded to read out his views to me for forty minutes with barely
time for a bite of toast.
But I was not to be put off. I repeated my proposals for local
elections in a speech that afternoon to a group of Israeli MPs at the
Knesset — the Israeli Parliament — chaired by the eloquent and
respected Abba Eban.
Later I went to a dinner with carefully selected moderate
Palestinians — mostly businessmen and academics — of precisely the
sort I felt the Israelis should be prepared to deal with. They poured out
their complaints, particularly about their treatment on the West Bank
and especially in Gaza, where conditions were worst, partly because of
insensitive security policing and partly, it seemed, because of
economic discrimination in favour of Jewish business. I promised to
take these matters up with Mr Peres — and did so in detail the
following day — but I also made clear to them the need to reject
terrorism and those who practised it. Although the general view was
that only the PLO were able to represent the Palestinians, I also
detected in conversations with smaller groups that this did not mean
that there was any great love for that organization.

During my visit I had two long discussions with Mr Peres. He was
conscious of the need to keep King Hussein’s now faltering peace
initiative in play, not least so as to avoid destabilizing Jordan itself.
But he was obviously highly sceptical about the proposal for an
international peace conference. For all his understanding of the need
for some kind of compromise, I did not come away with any real
optimism. In fact, the succession of Mr Shamir as Prime Minister
would soon seal off even these few shafts of light.
However intractable the diplomatic issues were, there was no doubt
about the warmth of my reception in Israel, which indeed continued to
grow as the visit went on. On Tuesday on my way to the airport for
my return flight I stopped at Ramat Gan, a suburb of Tel Aviv that was
twinned with Finchley. I had expected that I would be meeting the
mayor and a few other dignitaries, perhaps some old acquaintances.
Instead, 25,000 people were awaiting me. I was plunged into — at
times, to the horror of my detectives and staff, almost sank into — a
huge crowd of cheering residents, before being squeezed through and
onto a large platform from which I had to give an unscripted speech —
always the best. Later, during the Gulf War scud missiles from Iraq fell
on Ramat Gan. The people of Finchley raised money to rebuild the
houses that had been destroyed. This, I thought, was what ‘twinning’
should be all about.
AFRICA
The Problem of South Africa
I no more shared the established Foreign Office view of Africa than I
did of the Middle East. Whereas Israel was considered the pariah of
the Middle East with which we would be ill-advised too closely to
associate, this role was allotted within Africa to South Africa. The
basic, if usually unstated, assumption seemed to be that Britain’s
national interests required that we should ultimately be prepared to go
along with the opinions of the radical black African states in the
Commonwealth. In fact, a clear-sighted analysis suggested something
rather different.
Admitted that fundamental changes must be made in South Africa’s
system, the question was of how best to achieve them. It seemed to me
that the worst approach was to isolate South Africa further. Indeed,
the isolation had already gone too far, contributing to an inflexible,
siege mentality among the governing Afrikaner class. It was absurd to
believe that they would be prepared to relinquish power suddenly or
without acceptable safeguards. Indeed, had that occurred the result
would have been anarchy in which black South Africans would have
suffered most.

Nor, I knew, could the latter be considered a homogeneous group.
Tribal loyalties were of great importance. For example, the Zulus are a
proud and self-conscious nation with a distinct sense of identity. Any
new political framework for South Africa had to take account of such
differences. Not least because of these complexities, I did not believe
that it was for outsiders to impose a particular solution. What I wanted
to achieve was step-by-step reform — with more democracy, secure
human rights, and a flourishing free enterprise economy able to
generate the wealth to improve black living standards. I wanted to see
a South Africa which was fully reintegrated into the international
community. Nor did I ever feel, for all the sound and fury of the Left,
that this was anything other than a high ideal of which no one need be
ashamed.
It was also true that Britain had important trading interests in the
continent and that these were more or less equal in black Africa on the
one hand and South Africa on the other. South Africa had by far the
richest and most varied range of natural resources of any African
country. It was the world’s largest supplier of gold, platinum, gem
diamonds, chrome, vanadium, manganese and other vital materials.
Moreover, in a number of these cases South Africa’s only real rival was
the Soviet Union. Even if it had been morally acceptable to pursue a
policy which would have led to the collapse of South Africa, it would
not therefore have made strategic sense.
South Africa was rich not just because of natural resources but
because its economy was at least mainly run on free enterprise lines.
Other African countries, well endowed with natural resources, were
still poor because their economies were socialist and centrally
controlled. Consequently, the blacks in South Africa had higher
incomes and were generally better educated than elsewhere in Africa:
that was why the South Africans erected security fences to keep
intended immigrants out, unlike the Berlin Wall which kept those
blessed with a socialist system in. The critics of South Africa never
mentioned these inconvenient facts. But simply because I recognized
them did not mean that I held any brief for apartheid. The colour of
someone’s skin should not determine his or her political rights.
President P. W. Botha was to visit Europe on the occasion of the
fortieth anniversary of the Normandy Landings and I sent him an
invitation to come to see me at Chequers. He had a whole programme
of visits in Europe, made possible by an agreement that he had
reached earlier in the year with President Machel of Mozambique
which seemed a promising development to many European states.
Nevertheless, my invitation provoked accusations that I was ‘soft’ on
apartheid. On Wednesday 30 May Bishop Trevor Huddleston, the
veteran anti-apartheid campaigner, came to Downing Street to put the
case against my seeing Mr Botha. His argument was that the South
African President should not be accorded credibility as a man of peace
and that South Africa should not be allowed to re-enter the

international community until it changed its internal policies. This
seemed to me to miss the point. It was South Africa’s isolation which
was an obstacle to reform. Before his European trip, the only country
that Mr Botha had visited in recent years was Taiwan.
One thing which the opponents of apartheid — perhaps because so
many of them were socialists — never seemed fully to grasp was that
capitalism itself was probably the greatest force for reform and
political liberalization in South Africa, as it was in the communist
countries. South Africa could not fulfil its economic potential unless
black labour was brought in to the cities and trained. Capitalism in
South Africa was already creating a black middle class which would
ultimately insist on a share of power.

President Botha came to Chequers on the morning of Saturday 2
June. I had a private conversation with him which lasted some forty
minutes and then I was joined over lunch by Geoffrey Howe, Malcolm
Rifkind and officials — the South African President by his Foreign
minister R. F. (‘Pik’) Botha. President Botha told me that South Africa
never received any credit for the improvements which had been made
in the conditions of the blacks. Although there was some truth in this,
I had to tell him also how appalled we were by the forced removal of
blacks from areas which had been designated for white residents only.
I went on to raise the case of the imprisoned Nelson Mandela whose
freedom we had persistently sought. It was my view, moreover, that
no long-term solution to South Africa’s problems could be achieved
without his co-operation. But the main discussion concentrated on
Namibia, the former South African colony, where South Africa had
reimposed direct rule the previous year. Our policy was to support
Namibian independence. There was little progress here: South Africa
had no intention of allowing Namibia to become independent while
Cuban troops remained in Angola, but there was no prospect of Cuban
withdrawal until civil war ended in Angola — which at the time
seemed a forlorn hope. The South Africans clearly wanted to have
more secure relations with their neighbours and hoped that the carrot
of economic aid from South Africa might enable better relations to be
built. In fact, for the reasons outlined above, this was to be a vain
hope because the South African social and political system had begun
to hamper economic growth.
I did not particularly warm to President Botha, whom I had met
previously, but to do him justice he listened carefully to what I said. I
found that when I raised specific circumstances he was willing to look
into them personally and where he undertook to take action he proved
as good as his word. The most important result of this meeting,
however, was that from now on I was able to send him private
messages on delicate matters which probably constituted almost the
only helpful contact he had with western governments. As I told the
Cabinet afterwards, it must be right to expose him as much as possible
to our views. The arguments in favour of dialogue with the Soviet

Union applied with at least as much force to the need to maintain
contacts of this kind with South Africa.
The year 1985 was one of mounting crisis for South Africa. There
was widespread rioting. A state of emergency was declared in many
parts of the country. Foreign banks refused to renew South African
credit and the South African Government declared a four-month freeze
on the repayment of the principal of foreign debt. My old friend Fritz
Leutwiler, former head of the Swiss Central Bank, was appointed as a
mediator between the banks and the South African Government. We
kept in contact so I knew what was happening. The international
pressure on South Africa continued to mount. President Reagan, who
was as opposed to economic sanctions as I was, introduced a limited
package of sanctions to forestall pressure from Congress. It was clear
that the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in the
Bahamas at Nassau that October would be a difficult one for me.
So in September I held a seminar at Chequers to clarify our thinking
on tactics towards South Africa. Apart from Geoffrey Howe, Malcolm
Rifkind, Paul Channon and Ian Stewart (from the Treasury), there
were present a range of businessmen, academics and one or two
interested and well informed MPs. None of us would have ‘started
from here’ had we the choice. On the one hand the reform process in
South Africa had ground to a halt: the constitutional reforms had
proved a dead end because they did not involve even moderate
middle-class blacks. On the other, the European Community was
moving towards imposing sanctions. We had placed a reserve on the
measures agreed by the Community earlier that month, though in fact,
on closer inspection, most of these turned out to accord with our
existing practice and I agreed to lift it before the CHOGM. One idea
which was raised at the meeting was sending a ‘contact group’ of
‘eminent persons’ to try to get talks off the ground between the South
African Government and representatives of the black community.
In the run up to the conference I did what I could to try to slow
down the Gadarene rush towards imposing sanctions. I wrote to
Commonwealth heads of government urging that instead we try to
bring about negotiations between the South African Government and
representatives of the black population. But it was already clear that
we would be in for plenty of posturing from those intent on cutting a
figure on the international stage.
The CHOGM at Nassau
I saw Brian Mulroney in Nassau on the first evening of the conference.
He urged me to take the initiative by proposing a package of measures
representing the lowest common denominator of Commonwealth
agreement. All would be committed to it as the minimum, but it would
be open to individual governments to do more if they chose. I told him
that experience had taught me never to put forward ideas at too early

a stage and I ended by saying: ‘I have made my final — and I mean
final — step in accepting the European position on sanctions. I don’t
relish being isolated within the Commonwealth, but if necessary so be
it.’ I took the same line in similar meetings with Robert Mugabe,
Kenneth Kaunda and Bob Hawke.
Bob Hawke opened the conference debate on South Africa,
obviously seeking a compromise. Kenneth Kaunda followed with an
emotional call for sanctions. I tried to meet both points of view in my
reply. I began by detailing the evidence of social and economic change
in South Africa. I carefully cited the number of black South Africans
who had professional qualifications, who had cars, who were in
business. Of course, there was a long way to go. But we were not faced
with a static situation. The speech had an effect, as I saw from the
reactions of those around the table. But natural caution had led me to
have a fall-back position prepared: after my meeting with Brian
Mulroney my officials had worked up a note of options for further
measures, which I would take with me to the heads of government
retreat over the weekend at Lyford Cay, where I knew that the real
business would be done.
Lyford Cay is a beautiful spot with interesting historical
associations. Private houses in the estate had been made available for
the delegations. The central club there was effectively the Conference
Centre. In a rather nice touch the Prime Minister of the Bahamas had
seen that the house allocated to me and my delegation was the one
where the Polaris agreement had been signed by Harold Macmillan
and John Kennedy in 1962. At Lyford Cay a drafting committee of
heads of government was somehow formed and in the course of
Saturday morning drew up a draft communiqué on South Africa.
Meanwhile I got on with other work. At 2 o’clock Brian Mulroney and
Rajiv Gandhi arrived at the house to show me their best efforts. Alas, I
could not give them high marks and spent the best part of two hours
explaining why their proposals were unacceptable to me. I suggested
that the text should include a firm call for an end to violence in South
Africa as a condition for further dialogue: but this they considered far
too controversial.
After dinner I was invited to join a wider group and put under great
pressure to agree to the line they wanted. Bob Hawke bitterly attacked
me. I replied with vigour. In a steadily worsening atmosphere, the
argument went on for some three hours. Fortunately, I can never be
defeated by attrition.
Overnight, I had officials prepare an alternative text to be presented
at the plenary session due to begin at 10.30 next morning, before
which a dejected Sonny Ramphal, the Commonwealth SecretaryGeneral, begged me to compromise and show goodwill. There was
certainly not much goodwill evident when the meeting began. The
British text was not even considered. I was lectured on my political
morality, on my preferring British jobs to black lives, on my lack of

concern for human rights. One after the other, their accusations
became more vitriolic and personal until I could stand it no longer.
To their palpable alarm I began to tell my African critics a few home
truths. I noted that they were busily trading with South Africa at the
same time as they were attacking me for refusing to apply sanctions. I
wondered when they intended to show similar concern about abuses
in the Soviet Union, with which of course they often had not just trade
but close political links. I wondered when I was going to hear them
attack terrorism. I reminded them of their own less than impressive
record on human rights. And when the representative from Uganda
took me to task for racial discrimination, I turned on him and
reminded him of the Asians which Uganda had thrown out on racial
grounds, many of whom had come to settle in my constituency in
North London, where they were model citizens and doing very well.
No one spoke for my position, though President Jayewardene of Sri
Lanka caused something of a ripple when he said that in any case he
had no intention of ending trade links with South Africa because it
would throw the Sri Lankan tea planters out of work. The heads of
government of some of the smaller states also told me privately that
they agreed with me.
Over the lunch break I made a tactical decision as to which of the
prepared options I would concede. My modest choice was to take
unilateral action against the import of krugerrands and withdraw
official support for trade promotion with South Africa. I would only do
this, however, if there was a clear reference in the communiqué to the
need to stop the violence. Then at 3.30 p.m. I went to join the
‘drafting committee’ in the library.
As I entered the room they all glared at me. It was extraordinary
how the pack instinct of politicians could change a group of normally
courteous, in some cases even charming, people into a gang of bullies.
I had never been treated like this and I was not going to stand for it.
So I began by saying that I had never been so insulted as I had by the
people in that room and that it was an entirely unacceptable way of
conducting international business. At once the murmurs of surprise
and regret rose: one by one they protested that it was not ‘personal’. I
answered that it clearly was personal and I wasn’t having it. The
atmosphere immediately became more subdued. They asked me what I
would accept. I announced the concessions I was prepared to make. I
said that this was as far as I was going: if my proposals were not
accepted I would withdraw and the United Kingdom would issue its
own statement. The erstwhile ‘draftsmen’ went into a huddle. Ten
minutes later it was all over. I suddenly became a stateswoman for
having accepted a ‘compromise’. A text was agreed and at a plenary
session later that evening was accepted without amendment.
Though I was genuinely hurt and dismayed by the behaviour I had
witnessed, I was not displeased with the outcome. In particular, I was
glad that the Commonwealth heads of government endorsed an idea

with which several of us had been toying — the sending of a group of
‘eminent persons’ to South Africa to report back on the situation to a
future conference. This had the great merit of giving us time — both
to press the South Africans for further reform and to fight the
diplomatic battle. I sought to persuade Geoffrey Howe to be an
‘eminent person’ but he was most reluctant to do so. He probably rated
its chances of success as poor, and events proved him right. I may,
myself, have been less than tactful. For when he protested that he was
Foreign Secretary and could not do both jobs, I said that I could just
about cope with his as well while he was away. Since by now I was
firmly in charge of our approach to South Africa, making the main
decisions directly from No. 10, that may have been close to the bone.
One advantage of those eventually chosen as members of the ‘Eminent
Persons Group’ was that a distinguished black African, the Nigerian
General Obasanjo, would act as chairman of the group and would see
for himself what the reality of life in South Africa was. But this
advantage was more than cancelled out by the problems created by
Malcolm Fraser, still full of rancour at his election defeat by Bob
Hawke, longing to achieve a high international profile once more and
consequently making a thoroughly ‘eminent person’ of himself.
At the press conference after the summit I described, with complete
accuracy, the concessions I had made on sanctions as ‘tiny’, which
enraged the Left and undoubtedly irritated the Foreign Office. But I
did not believe in sanctions and I was not prepared to justify them. I
was able to leave the shores of Nassau with my policy intact, albeit
with my personal relations with Commonwealth leaders somewhat
bruised: but that, after all, was not entirely my fault. And there were
thousands of black Africans who would keep their jobs because of the
battle I had fought.
More arguments about sanctions in the EC and the Commonwealth
I had no illusions that I had succeeded in doing anything more at
Nassau than stave off for the present the pressure for sanctions against
South Africa. It remained to be seen what would come of the ‘eminent
persons’ visit to southern Africa. In fact it was an unmitigated disaster.
Whether to scupper the initiative or for quite unconnected reasons, the
South African armed forces launched raids against African National
Congress (ANC) bases in Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe and the
EPG cut short their visit.
This gave me a very difficult hand to play at the European Council
meeting at the Hague in June 1986 — and because the actions of
European Community countries, unlike most Commonwealth
members, could have a real impact on the South African economy this
was at least as important a forum for the sanctions issue as was
CHOGM. The Dutch themselves — the Netherlands having been the
original home of the Afrikaners — suffered from a pervasive guilt

complex about South Africa, which did not make them ideal chairmen.
But Chancellor Kohl — who, at least at this stage, was as strongly
opposed to sanctions as I was — led the debate. I supported him,
followed by the Prime Minister of Portugal. In the end we agreed to
consider introducing later in the year a ban on new investment and
sanctions on imports of South African coal, iron, steel and
krugerrands. But it was also agreed that Geoffrey Howe should, as a
sort of lone ‘eminent person’ and in view of the fact that Britain would
shortly be taking on the presidency of the Community, visit South
Africa to press for reform and the release of Nelson Mandela.
Geoffrey was extremely reluctant to go and it must be said that his
reluctance proved justified since he was insulted by President Kaunda
and brushed off by President Botha. I later learned that he thought I
had set him up for an impossible mission and was deeply angry about
it. I can only say that I had no such intention. I had a real admiration
for Geoffrey’s talent for quiet diplomacy. If anyone could have made a
breakthrough he would have done it.
Shortly after Geoffrey’s return I had to face the Special
Commonwealth Conference on South Africa which we had agreed at
Lyford Cay to review progress. It had been decided that seven
Commonwealth heads of governments would meet in London in
August. The worst aspect was that because of President P.W. Botha’s
obstinacy we did not have enough to show by way of progress since
the Nassau CHOGM. There had been some significant reforms and the
partial state of emergency had been lifted in March. But a nationwide
state of emergency had been imposed in June, Mr Mandela was still in
prison, and the ANC and other similar organizations were still banned.
With the fiasco of the ‘Eminent Persons Group’ in addition, there was
no prospect of peaceful political dialogue between the South African
Government and representatives of the black population. The US
Congress was exerting increasing pressure for tough sanctions and
later in the year forced a change in the Administration’s policy by
overruling President Reagan’s veto on a new sanctions bill. It was clear
that I would have to come up with some modest package of measures,
though whether this would arrest the march towards full-scale
economic sanctions was doubtful. In any case, I had a little list. For
use as a diplomatic weapon of a rather different kind I had another
little list of Commonwealth countries which applied detention without
trial and similar illiberal practices — just in case.
The media and the Opposition were by now quite obsessive about
South Africa. There was talk of the Commonwealth breaking up if
Britain did not change its position on sanctions, though there was
never any likelihood of either event. I was always convinced — and
my postbag showed — that the views and priorities of these
commentators were quite unrepresentative of what the general public
felt. But that did not make it any more pleasant. On the eve of the
conference Denis and I visited Edinburgh where the Commonwealth

Games were to be held. We went to see the competitors — those at
least whose countries had not boycotted the event — in the Games
‘village’, to be met by a few catcalls and some sour criticism. I did not
disagree with Denis when he remarked that this was ‘one of the most
poisonous visits’ we had ever made. It was a relief to dine that evening
with my good friend Laurens van der Post who talks good sense about
South Africa and who had been very helpful when we were
negotiating independence for Zimbabwe.
Then it was back to more irrationality as the Special Conference
opened in London. My meetings with heads of government before the
official opening filled me with gloom. Brian Mulroney urged me to
have Britain ‘give a lead’ and seemed to want me to reveal my
negotiating hand to him in advance: but this I had no intention of
doing, having on many an occasion seen such ‘concessions’ pocketed
and then immediately forgotten. Kenneth Kaunda was in a thoroughly
self-righteous and unco-operative frame of mind when I dropped in to
see him at his hotel. He predicted that if sanctions were not applied,
South Africa would go up in flames. I wound up the meeting smartly
and said that it would be better if we postponed our discussion. Later I
told Rajiv Gandhi that I would be prepared to move ‘a little’ at the
conference. He seemed rather more amenable than he had been at
Nassau, as indeed he usually was in private.
In fact, the formal discussions were every bit as unpleasant as at
Lyford Cay, though at least they were shorter. My refusal to go along
with the sanctions they wanted was attacked by Messrs Kaunda,
Mugabe, Mulroney and Hawke. I found no support. Their proposals
went well beyond what had been proposed the previous year. At
Nassau they had wanted to cut off air links with South Africa, to
introduce a ban on investment, agricultural imports, the promotion of
tourism and other measures. Now they were demanding not only that
these sanctions go ahead, but a whole raft of additional measures: a
ban on new bank loans, imports of uranium, coal, iron and steel and
the withdrawal of consular facilities. Such a package sacrificed the
living standards of South Africa’s black population to the posturing of
South Africa’s critics and the interests of their domestic industries. I
was simply not prepared to endorse it. Instead, I had a separate
paragraph inserted into the communiqué detailing our own approach
which noted our willingness to go along with a ban on South African
coal, iron and steel imports, if the European Community decided on it,
and to introduce straight away voluntary bans on new investment and
the promotion of tourism in South Africa. In the event we in the
Community decided against the sanctions on coal, to which the
Germans were particularly strongly opposed, though the other
sanctions proposed at the Hague were introduced in September 1986.
Perhaps the most extraordinary feature of these discussions was that
they seemed to be carried on without regard to what was happening in
South Africa itself. P. W. Botha’s Government was unimaginative and

inflexible and the nationwide state of emergency had been imposed.
But, as I was informed by our excellent new ambassador, Robin
Renwick, and by others who had dealings with the real rather than the
bogus South Africa, fundamental changes were taking place. Black
trade unions had been legalized, the Mixed Marriages Act had been
repealed, influx controls had been abolished and the general policy
(though not without exceptions) of forced removals of blacks had
ended. So had job reservation for whites and the very unpopular pass
laws. Still more important, there was a practical breakdown of
apartheid at the work place, in hotels, in offices and in city centres.
The repeal of the Separate Amenities Act had been proposed and
seemed likely to be implemented. In all these ways ‘apartheid’, as the
Left continued to describe it, was if not dead at least rapidly dying. Yet
South Africa received no credit for this, only unthinking hostility.
I was less prepared than ever to go along with measures which
would weaken the South African economy and thus slow down reform.
So as the 1987 CHOGM at Vancouver approached I was still in no
mood for compromise. In some respects the position was easier for me
than it had been at Nassau and in London. Events in Fiji and in Sri
Lanka were likely to occupy a good deal of attention at the conference.
My line on sanctions was well known and the domestic pressure on me
had decreased: I had made headway in winning the sanctions
argument at home during the London conference. But it would not all
be plain sailing. It seemed to me that the Canadians, our hosts, wanted
to be more African than the Africans — particularly since countries
like Zimbabwe knew that they could not possibly afford to implement
full-scale sanctions themselves and hoped that we would do it for
them. Brian Mulroney was keen to gain agreement for setting up a
committee of Commonwealth Foreign ministers to monitor events in
South Africa, which seemed to me not just a waste of time but
counterproductive — as I told Mr Mulroney at a meeting with him on
the eve of the conference. I said that its only purpose would be to
satisfy the ego of the Commonwealth heads of government and I
would criticize it publicly and strongly.
I also had a talk with President Kaunda who was under some
pressure to set his own country’s economic affairs in order to meet the
requirements of the IMF. Our views were no more similar on South
Africa than they had been. At one point I said that I regretted that I
had not yet been able to visit Africa, apart from my attendance at the
Lusaka CHOGM in 1979. Mr Kaunda said that Africa was not at all my
area, which I found intensely irritating. I retorted that he himself had
charged me with the duty of bringing Rhodesia to full independence as
Zimbabwe at the Lusaka Conference and that I had accomplished it.
But his off-hand remark did confirm me in my intention of making a
visit soon to black African countries.
In my speech to the conference I pointed out just how damaging
sanctions and disinvestment were to those we were allegedly trying to

help. I gave the example of an Australian firm which had just closed a
fish-canning factory near Cape Town putting 120 non-whites out of
jobs. I noted that a general ban on fruit and vegetable exports would
destroy between 100,000 and 200,000 non-white jobs — and all those
affected would have no social security benefits to fall back on. Nearer
the knuckle, I said that I well understood why neighbouring countries
had not imposed the whole range of sanctions. Eighty per cent of
Zimbabwe’s external trade passed through South Africa. A million
migrant workers earned their living there. Over half of Lesotho’s GNP
came from their remittances. So I was more firmly convinced than
ever that sanctions were not the answer. Of course, such arguments
cut little ice with those determined on gestures.

As usual, the main decisions were deferred for the — this time
mercifully quite brief — retreat at the Lake Okanagan resort up in the
mountains. The discussions took place and meals were provided at a
central hotel with individual chalets dotted around it. It was bitterly
cold at Lake Okanagan. But the Africans, of course, felt it more than I
did. They turned up at the central hotel with blankets over their
shoulders. Rajiv Gandhi obviously considered that exercise was the
best way to keep warm and always seemed to appear in a tracksuit
having jogged between meetings.
The atmosphere at our discussions was not much warmer. I was not
prepared to go along with the draft communiqué which they wanted.
At a dinner given by Rajiv Gandhi back in Vancouver I was left to kick
my heels for forty-five minutes on my own waiting for other heads of
government to turn up. They had in fact been holding a press
conference on South Africa to which I had not been invited and of
whose existence I was unaware.
But we had given as good as we got. In reply to the sanctimonious
criticism of our Canadian hosts, I had figures released which showed
that Canada’s imports from South Africa had risen. It was a useful
comment on the Commonwealth heads’ sincerity. Not just Mr
Mulroney, but almost everyone else it seemed, exploded with
indignation at this intrusion of fact upon rhetoric. My suspicion that in
this the political leaders were out of step with the people was
confirmed when I received a rapturous reception from the crowds in
Vancouver: one man kept on shouting ‘Hang in there girl, hang in
there.’ I did.
Visits to Black Africa
Whatever Kenneth Kaunda thought of it, I was now determined to pay
a visit to black Africa. It seemed absurd to allow the public arguments
about South Africa to get in the way of that. I knew perfectly well
from private discussions with African leaders that many of them
wanted closer links with Britain. They also generally respect strength
in leaders. No one gets very far in African politics without being

tough. I also intended to use my visit for a purpose which was to
become still more important during the rest of my premiership: I
wanted to spread the message that a combination of limited
government, financial orthodoxy and free enterprise would work for
prosperity in underdeveloped countries as well as it did in the
prosperous West. I chose Kenya and Nigeria for my first African
political safari. In both cases this was with good reason.
Kenya was the most pro-western, most free enterprise of the
important black African states. Nigeria was the most populous African
state — one in four Africans is a Nigerian — and a country of huge
potential, if only it could achieve sound public finances and public
administration. Both President Moi of Kenya and General Babangida of
Nigeria were pro-British, though Nigerian feeling towards us was more
volatile and on the South African question extremely hostile. Britain
was the largest foreign investor in both countries — and in the case of
Kenya the largest aid donor too.
I arrived in Nairobi on the evening of Monday 4 January 1988, to be
met by President Moi. He had a dignified, rather grave manner, with
something of the tribal chief about him: we always got on well. But his
human rights record was no better than that of many Commonwealth
heads of government. Although we disagreed about South Africa, he
was a moderate and one of the forces for common sense at CHOGMs.
Denis and I and our party stayed at the government guesthouse,
which left something to be desired. Denis tried to run a bath but found
that there was no water and it had to be brought up in dustbins from
the cellar: we heated it up on gas rings in the kitchen. Then no sooner
did we have hot water than the lights went out.
But whatever difficulties there were with the facilities, there was
none with the welcome. President Moi, who loved nothing better than
to get out of Nairobi into the countryside, accompanied me on a
fascinating itinerary. Kenya, unlike some other African countries, has
never lost sight of the importance of agriculture. Great efforts were
clearly being put into improving it. I visited a Masai rural training
centre and inspected their lugubrious cattle, toured a tea plantation,
met a polygamous sugar farmer with twenty-three immaculately
turned-out young children and then went on to what was described as
a ‘Women’s Poultry Project’. This visit had been suggested by the
British Overseas Development Administration (ODA) as a model small
agricultural project. Unfortunately, the Kenyan Government, on
learning that I was to go there, upgraded the whole project and moved
the chickens into conditions of great luxury, which of course largely
destroyed the point of the visit. Everywhere I went I was struck by the
good-humoured reception I received. The bitternesses of the 1950s had
clearly been forgotten. It was an encouraging start.
I then went on to make a fleeting visit to Nigeria. I arrived at Lagos
on the morning of Thursday 7 January and had talks with General
Babangida. He was a forceful, intelligent man, trying to put Nigeria’s

economy on to a sounder footing and in due course, we hoped, to
create the conditions for a restoration of democracy. We had helped
Nigeria in its dealings with the IMF and this was appreciated. General
Babangida seemed to be open to my suggestions about the need to
curb Nigeria’s budget deficit, cut inflation and provide reassurances
for foreign investors. We also saw eye to eye about the dangers of
Soviet and Cuban involvement in Africa.
The next day I flew to the very north of the country to attend a
Durbar as the guest of the Emir of Kano. It was a difficult landing
because of the cloud of fine Sahara sand suspended in the air. Denis
was sitting in the aeroplane cockpit and he told me afterwards that
there had only been a relatively brief period of visibility before
landing. This real danger was, however, entirely subordinated to one
manufactured by the British press. On the way up to the Emir’s box,
from where I was to view the horses and camels parading below, I lost
contact with the rest of my staff who were jostled by an
overenthusiastic crowd and then treated with some vigour by anxious
security guards confused about their identity. Bernard Ingham
received a none too gentle rifle butt in the stomach. Later in the day
an anxious Nigel Wicks, my principal private secretary at No. 10, rang
up to see whether we were still in one piece. In fact — unaware of the
confusion — I had been enjoying myself hugely, holding on to a rather
fabulous hat I was wearing with the Nigerian national colours on it as
horsemen charged in a cloud of dust up to where the Emir, Denis and I
were seated. At the end I was presented with a horse myself as a gift;
but, arguing that it would be happier with its own horse acquaintances
than in a British stable, I prevailed on my hosts to keep it for me.
The success of this visit convinced me that I should make a more
ambitious foray into Africa the following year and this was now
arranged. I would go first to Morocco — which is essentially part of
the Arab world — and then on to Zimbabwe, Malawi, possibly
Namibia, and Nigeria once more.
I already had the greatest regard for King Hassan of Morocco, who
was always underrated as a player in Middle Eastern politics. I had
met him in London two years earlier when he was on a state visit. On
this occasion our talk was mainly of the Arab-Israeli dispute and
military co-operation between Britain and Morocco. As well as being
enormously cultivated — he speaks half a dozen languages and can
make an impromptu speech in any of them — the King has an icy
nerve. When I heard from him about the measures he took to protect
himself from further assassination attempts I understood that he, like
me, understood what it meant to live as a terrorist target.
Then I flew to Lagos. This was just a stop-over visit and General
Babangida came to the airport to have lunch with me. I was glad to
learn that he was not just pressing ahead with, but actually
toughening, the economic reform programme on which Nigeria had
embarked. With our support, Nigeria now had the approval of the IMF

and its main western creditors and had secured a rescheduling of debt
to its public sector creditors. It is never an easy task to govern a
country like Nigeria — it is a somewhat artificial creation divided
between the Muslim North and the Christian and pagan South — let
alone to do so under conditions of economic austerity.
I arrived at Harare, Zimbabwe, at 10 o’clock that night, to be met by
Robert Mugabe and a floodlit, noisy tribal welcome. It was nearly ten
years since I had convened the Lancaster House Conference which led
to Mr Mugabe peacefully taking power in Zimbabwe. Since then
Britain had provided more than £200 million in aid and military
training. Britain was also the largest investor. Zimbabwe could still
boast of one of the strongest African economies outside South Africa.
But Mr Mugabe’s doctrinaire socialism, suspicion of foreign investment
and reluctance to accept the prescriptions of the IMF and the World
Bank were taking their toll. I had little reason to expect that I could
persuade him to my point of view on the South African sanctions
question, but I hoped that I might succeed in bringing him to accept
the need for changes in economic policy. At my talks with him the
following morning I sought to do this by describing my own economic
policies in the United Kingdom where we were reducing the role of the
state in the economy and encouraging free enterprise: this, I said, was
why our economy was growing and enabling us to provide aid for
Zimbabwe. I also drew attention to a recent World Bank study which
showed that those African countries which followed programmes
recommended by the IMF did better than those which did not. Mr
Mugabe recognized, at least in principle, the need to devise an
investment code so as to give asssurance to foreign investors. But I was
not convinced that the rest of my message really went home. Much of
our discussion, however, was about the situation in neighbouring
African states, not least Mozambique. I was shortly to learn more
about this.
Later that morning I flew out with President Mugabe to the training
camp at Nyanga on the border with Mozambique. There I was met by
President Chissano of Mozambique and the three of us had lunch in a
tent on a bluff overlooking a deep valley. Then I watched the British
troops training Mozambique soldiers to fight the RENAMO guerillas. I
could not help reflecting how impossible this prospect would have
seemed back in 1979 when I was trying to bring Rhodesia back to
peace and legality. It would probably have seemed hardly less
improbable to those of my left-wing critics who considered my stand
against sanctions as a kind of racist impulse.
The following evening (Thursday 30 March) I flew from Harare to
Blantyre, Malawi. The journey was short and so my VC10 was flying
lower than usual — too low for comfort, since at one point we were
fired on with missiles by RENAMO. Fortunately they missed. I was met
at the airport — with another floodlit tribal greeting — by President
Banda. It was an unforgettable occasion. He was an extraordinary

man. Although probably in his early nineties, I found him, in my talks,
bright, alert and humorous. Almost alone, he had built up Malawi, a
poor country, into one with sound finances and sensibly developed
agriculture. I stayed with him in his official residence, the Sanjika
Palace, where I would come across him wearing dark formal dress and
a black hat which he would doff when I met him in the corridor. There
was another, less agreeable, side to his regime. Opponents quickly
found themselves in jail and traders who, like several of my own Asian
constituents, tried to get their money out of the country had their
property confiscated.
Early next morning I helicoptered out to the Mankhokwe Refugee
Camp on the border with Mozambique. Most of the flight was over
mountains which then dropped away to a plain on which a vast
refugee camp housing over 600,000 people had been built. These
refugees had fled from the civil war in Mozambique. What they told
me about the atrocities committed and the reign of fear created in
their villages by RENAMO was truly horrifying. I saw some of those
who had just recently fled: they had not eaten for several days and had
travelled by night. Their eyes had that deadness which total
exhaustion brings. After this, I could never be tempted to regard
RENAMO as anti-communist freedom fighters in the way that some
right-wing Americans continued to. They were terrorists.
That night President Banda hosted a state banquet for me. It was a
memorable occasion, not least because it lasted over five hours. Each
new dish which was brought in was presented first to the President
before being served to his guests. My own gaze fell on a giant
chocolate cockerel: I can never resist chocolate. Zulus sang and danced
throughout the banquet. Then Dr Banda rose to speak. An hour later
his account of his life and experiences had only reached 1945. Some of
his guests had actually fallen asleep. At this point the lady who acted
as his hostess gave him a hard nudge and reminded him of the time.
We got through the next forty-three years in five minutes flat. In
consideration of those present I cut down my own speech accordingly.
Hardly anyone knew that from Blantyre I intended to fly to
Windhoek, Namibia: the press who were with us were only told after
we had taken off. The UN plan to bring Namibia (formerly South-West
Africa) to democratic independence had been drawn up in the late
1970s but only now, as a result of American efforts to broker a
settlement of the Angolan civil war — to which we had given strong
support — was it possible to put it into effect. Security Council
Resolution 632 of 16 February 1989 was to be implemented from
Saturday 1 April — the day on which I arrived in Windhoek — with a
view to elections later in the year.
On my arrival I was met by the three key figures — the UN Special
Representative (Mr Ahtisaari), the UN Force Commander (General
Prem Chand) and the South African Administrator-General (Mr
Pienaar). Denis and I then visited and had lunch with the small British

Signals contingent in their base camp, visited the Rossing Uranium
Mine — where I was much impressed by the housing and welfare
services provided for the employees — and then returned to
Windhoek. By now it was clear that the whole UN solution to the
Namibian problem was at mortal risk. In flagrant disregard of previous
undertakings that no armed personnel would come south of the 16th
Parallel (well within Angola) hundreds of SWAPO (South-West Africa
People’s Organization) troops had crossed the border into Namibia
with military equipment. I was not in the least convinced by the
reaction of the SWAPO leader — Sam Nujoma — who claimed that his
organization was faithfully abiding by the cease-fire and that the socalled invaders must be South Africans in disguise.

But nor did I believe that it would do anything but harm — not least
to South Africa — if the South Africans now responded by unilaterally
moving their own forces out of barracks to drive SWAPO back. I met
Pik Botha, the South African Foreign minister, at Windhoek Airport. I
said that SWAPO had done wrong and therefore South Africa must act
with scrupulous correctness. ‘Never put yourself in the wrong’, I said,
‘particularly when your opponents have just done so.’ I told him that
he must get in touch with the UN representative and General Prem,
present his evidence before them and ask for their authority to get his
troops and helicopters out of barracks. I rang Mr Ahtisaari myself to
alert him to what was happening.
In fact, the UN did authorize the South Africans to use their forces.
But it was all legal. Though there were many casualties, a full-scale
confrontation was avoided, assembly points were designated to which
SWAPO units reported to be escorted back across the border with their
arms by UN forces, a new cease-fire was agreed — and this now held.
That autumn SWAPO won the elections for the Namibian Constituent
Assembly and Mr Nujoma became President — in which capacity he
thanked me when I was at the United Nations in September 1990 for
my intervention. In fact, I had held no brief for SWAPO. But I did
believe that only with the issue of Namibia sorted out could there be
peaceful change in South Africa. I had been the right person in the
right place at the right time.
But my activities in black Africa had little impact on
‘Commonwealth opinion’. Nor, it seemed, did changes in South Africa
itself.
Rhetoric and Reality in South Africa, 1989–1990
I had always felt that fundamental reform would never take place
while P. W. Botha was President. But in January 1989 Mr Botha
suffered a stroke and the following month was succeeded as National
Party Leader by F. W. de Klerk, who became President in August. It
was surely right to give the new South African leader the opportunity
to make his mark without ham-fisted outside intervention.

The 1989 CHOGM was due to take place in October in Kuala
Lumpur, hosted by Dr Mahathir. I went there with a new Foreign
Secretary, John Major, and a renewed determination not to go further
down the path of sanctions. I also tried to raise the sights of those
present to the great changes which were taking place in the world
around them. Introducing the session on the ‘World Political Scene’ I
drew attention to the momentous changes occurring in the Soviet
Union and their implications for all of us. I said that there was now
the prospect of settling regional conflicts — not least those in Africa —
which had been aggravated by the international subversion of
communism. Throughout the world we must now ardently advocate
democracy and a much freer economic system. I secretly hoped that
the message would not be lost on the many illiberal, collectivist
Commonwealth countries whose representatives were present.
But the debate on South Africa brought out all the old venom. Bob
Hawke and Kenneth Kaunda argued the case for sanctions. I
intervened to read out a letter I had recently received from a British
company which had invested in pineapple-canning in South Africa, but
found its export markets in the USA and Canada cut off by sanctions
and had therefore been forced to close, putting 1,100 black and 40
white South Africans out of work. That was the only sense in which
sanctions ‘worked’. I also quoted figures to show that Britain’s share of
South African imports and exports had fallen further over the last
eight years than that of the rest of the Commonwealth, adding that our
share had largely been picked up by Japan and Germany. I pointed out
that Britain was providing substantial help for black South Africans,
their education, their housing, rural projects, refugees from
Mozambique and aid to the ‘front line’ states. We were assisting
‘Operation Hunger’ which provides meals for millions of poor South
Africans. By contrast, the aim of many others at the CHOGM seemed
to be to multiply the number of those who were hungry.
By now I was quite used to the vicious, personal attacks in which
my Commonwealth colleagues liked to indulge. John Major was not:
he found their behaviour quite shocking. I left him back in Kuala
Lumpur with the other Foreign ministers to draft the communiqué
while I and the other heads of government went off to our retreat in
Langkawi. While I was there my officials faxed through a text which
the Foreign ministers apparently thought we could all ‘live with’. But I
could only live with it if I also put out a separate unambiguous
statement of our own views. I had it drafted and sent back to John
Major in Kuala Lumpur. Contrary to what the press — almost as eager
for ‘splits’ as they were for describing Britain’s ‘isolation’ —
subsequently alleged, John was quite happy to go along with issuing a
separate British document and made some changes to it, which I
agreed. I suspect that he had had his fill of Commonwealth diplomacy
already. The issue, however, of our separate document prompted
howls of anger from the other heads of government. At the session of

CHOGM at which Dr Mahathir reported on the retreat at Langkawi
Bob Hawke intervened to protest about what Britain had done. Brian
Mulroney followed this up. It was, in fact, clearly planned. They
arrived at the meeting together and signalled to each other before Bob
Hawke spoke. I replied by saying that I owed nobody an explanation
and was astounded that anyone should object to a nation putting
forward its own viewpoint. They had put forward their views in
speeches and press conferences and Britain had as much right to free
speech as they did. That ended the discussion.
In South Africa as 1990 opened the movement which I had hoped
and worked for began. There were indications that Nelson Mandela
would, after all the years of pressure, not least from me, shortly be
released. I told our ambassador, Robin Renwick, that I would welcome
the chance to see President de Klerk at Chequers if he visited Europe
in the spring. I told the Foreign Office — who did not like it one bit —
that as soon as Mr Mandela was freed I wanted us to respond rapidly
by rescinding or relaxing the measures we had taken against South
Africa, starting with the relatively minor ones which rested with us
alone and did not have to be discussed with the European Community.
On 2 February 1990 President de Klerk made a speech which
announced Mr Mandela’s and other black leaders’ imminent release,
the unbanning of the ANC and other black political organizations and
promised an end to the state of emergency as soon as possible. I
immediately went back to the Foreign Office and said that once the
promises were fulfilled we should end the ‘voluntary’ ban on
investment and encourage the other European Community countries to
do likewise. I asked Douglas Hurd — now Foreign Secretary — to
propose to other Community Foreign ministers at his forthcoming
meeting with them an end to the restrictions on purchase of
krugerrands and iron and steel. I also decided to send messages to
other heads of government urging practical recognition of what was
happening in South Africa.
In April I was briefed by Dr Gerrit Viljoen, the South African
Minister for Constitutional Development, on the contacts between the
South African Government and the ANC, now effectively led once
more by Mr Mandela. I was disappointed by the fact that Mr Mandela
kept repeating the old ritual phrases, arguably suitable for a
movement refused recognition, but not for one aspiring to a leading
and perhaps dominant role in government. The South African
Government was formulating its own ideas for the constitution and
was moving towards a combination of a lower house elected by oneman one-vote with an upper chamber with special minority
representation. This would help to accommodate the great ethnic
diversity which characterizes South Africa, although in the long run
some sort of cantonal system may be needed to do this efficiently.
By the time that President de Klerk set off for his talks with
European leaders in May, discussions with the ANC had begun in

earnest. I was also glad that the South African Government was paying
due regard to Chief Buthelezi, who had been such a stalwart opponent
of violent uprising in South Africa while the ANC had been endorsing
the Marxist revolution, to which some of its members are still
attached.
Talks with President de Klerk and Mr Mandela
President de Klerk, Pik Botha and their wives came to talks and lunch
at Chequers on Saturday 19 May. I felt that Mr de Klerk had grown in
stature since my last meeting with him a year ago. It struck me that
there were parallels with Mr Gorbachev — though perhaps neither
would have welcomed the comparison: in each case one man brought
to power through an unjust and oppressive system had the
combination of vision and prudence to set about changing that system.
My talks with Mr de Klerk focused on his plans for the next steps in
bringing the ANC to accept a political and economic system which
would secure South Africa’s future as a liberal, free enterprise country.
The violence between blacks, which was to get worse, was already the
single biggest obstacle to progress. But he was optimistic about the
prospects for agreement with the ANC on a new constitution; and he
thought that the ANC wanted this too.
We discussed what should be done about sanctions. He said that he
was not like a dog begging for a biscuit, seeking specific rewards for
actions he took. What he wanted was the widest possible international
recognition of and support for what he was doing, leading to a
fundamental revision of attitudes towards South Africa. This seemed to
me very sensible. Mr de Klerk also invited me to South Africa. I said
that I would love to come but I did not want to make things more
difficult for him at this particular moment. There was, I knew, nothing
more likely to sour his dealings with other governments who had been
proved wrong about South Africa than for me to arrive in his country
as a kind of proclamation that I had been right. (In fact, it is a
disappointment to me that I was never to go to South Africa as Prime
Minister and I only finally accepted his invitation after I left office.)
On Wednesday 4 July I held talks and had lunch at Downing Street
with the other main player in South African politics, Nelson Mandela. I
had seen him briefly in the spring when he had been feted by the
media Left, attending a concert in Wembley in his honour, but this was
the first time I really got to know him. The Left were rather offended
that he was prepared to see me at all. But then he, unlike them, had a
shrewd view as to what kind of pressure for his release had been more
successful. I found Mr Mandela supremely courteous, with a genuine
nobility of bearing and — most remarkable after all he had suffered —
without any bitterness. I warmed to him. But I also found him very
outdated in his attitudes, stuck in a kind of socialist timewarp in
which nothing had moved on, not least in economic thinking, since the

1940s. Perhaps this was not surprising in view of his long years of
imprisonment: but it was a disadvantage in the first few months of his
freedom because he tended to repeat these outdated platitudes which
in turn confirmed his followers in their exaggerated expectations.
I made four main points in our discussion. First, I urged him to
suspend the ‘armed struggle’. Whatever justification there might have
been for this was now gone. Second, I supported the South African
Government’s arguments against having an elected Constituent
Assembly to draw up a constitution. It seemed to me that in order to
maintain both the confidence of the white population and law and
order it should be for the Government, the ANC and Inkatha (Chief
Buthelezi’s movement) and others to agree on a constitution now.
Third, I pointed out the harm which all his talk of nationalization
could do to foreign investment and the economy in general. Finally, I
said that I thought he should meet Chief Buthelezi personally — which
he was refusing to do. This was the only hope for ending the violence
between their supporters. Our relationship was unharmed by my
straight talking. In spite of his socialist outlook, I believed that South
Africa was lucky to have a man of Mr Mandela’s stature at such a time.
Indeed, I hoped he would assert himself more at the expense of some
of his ANC colleagues.
It was only shortly before I left office that President de Klerk again
came to see me at Chequers — on Sunday 14 October. There had been
some progress since I had seen Mr Mandela in June. The ANC had
agreed to suspend the ‘armed struggle’ and the two sides had agreed in
principle on the arrangements for the return of South African exiles
and the release of the rest of the political prisoners. The remaining
features of the old apartheid system were being dismantled. The Land
Acts were due to be repealed and the Population Registration Act —
the last remaining legislative pillar of apartheid — would go when a
new constitution was agreed. Only state education remained
segregated but movement on this — for the whites — very sensitive
matter had also begun. However, violence between blacks had sharply
worsened and this was poisoning the atmosphere for negotiations.
The South Africans were being careful about pressing for the lifting
of the remaining sanctions. The most important contribution to this
would have been that of the ANC: but they stubbornly refused to
recognize that the case for sanctions — to the extent it had ever
existed — was dead. Within the European Community, the key to a
formal change of policy now was Germany, but for domestic political
reasons Chancellor Kohl was still unwilling to act. The Americans held
back for similar reasons. However, as President de Klerk told me, in
practice most of the economic sanctions were being steadily eroded
and what really mattered to the South Africans now was access to
foreign loans and investment. (In fact, sanctions were gradually
dismantled over the next few years: indeed the international
community began to prepare financial aid for South Africa to undo the

damage that sanctions had wrought.)
President de Klerk was clearly frustrated that the further round of
informal talks with the ANC on the constitution for which he had been
pressing had still not occurred. The longer the process continued the
more opportunity there was for hardliners — on either side — to
derail the negotiations. The main principle to which he held was that
there must be power sharing in the Executive. In the new South Africa
no one must have as much power as he himself had now. In some
respects he thought that the Swiss Federal Cabinet was a guide to what
was needed. This seemed to me to be very much on the right lines —
not that either hybrid constitutions or federal systems have much
inherent appeal, but in states where allegiances are at least as much to
subordinate groups as to the overarching institutions of the state itself
these things may constitute the least bad approach. It remains to be
seen whether the ANC leadership is prepared to recognize this. With
all the risks of violence and all the shortcomings of the various
political factions, South Africa remains the strongest economy on the
continent and has the most skilled and educated population. It would
be a tragedy if it cannot exploit these advantages to build a genuine
democracy, which respects minority rights, on the foundation of a free
economy.
*
*

See pp. 259–162.
See p. 75.

On 22 July 1946 91 people were killed when the hotel was bombed by Jewish
terrorists from a group led by Menachem Begin.
*

CHAPTER XVIII

Jeux Sans Frontières
Relations with the European Community — 1984–1987

TWO VISIONS OF EUROPE
The wisdom of hindsight, so useful to historians and indeed to authors
of memoirs, is sadly denied to practising politicians. Looking back, it is
now possible to see the period of my second term as Prime Minister as
that in which the European Community subtly but surely shifted its
direction away from being a Community of open trade, light
regulation and freely co-operating sovereign nation-states towards
statism and centralism. I can only say that it did not seem like that at
the time. For it was during this period that I not only managed to
secure a durable financial settlement of Britain’s Community budget
imbalance and began to get Europe to take financial discipline more
seriously, but also launched the drive for a real Common Market free
of hidden protectionism. It was clear to me from the start that there
were two competing visions of Europe: but I felt that our vision of a
free enterprise Europe des patries was predominant.
Now I see the period somewhat differently. For the underlying
forces of federalism and bureaucracy were gaining in strength as a
coalition of Socialist and Christian Democrat governments in France,
Spain, Italy and Germany forced the pace of integration and a
commission, equipped with extra powers, began to manipulate them to
advance its own agenda. It was only in my last days in office and
under my successor that the true scale of the challenge has become
clear.
At this time I genuinely believed that once our budget contribution
had been sorted out and we had set in place a framework of financial
order, Britain would be able to play a strong positive role in the
Community. I considered myself a European idealist, even if my ideals
differed somewhat from those expressed with varying degrees of
sincerity by other European heads of government. I told a dinner of
Conservative MEPs on Thursday 8 March 1984:
I don’t want to paper over the cracks. I want to get rid of the cracks. I want
to rebuild the foundations.

… I want to solve [the current problems] so that we can set about building
the Community of the future. A Community striving for freer trade, breaking
down the barriers in Europe and the world to the free flow of goods, capital
and services; working together to make Europe the home of the industries of
tomorrow; seizing the initiative on world problems, not reacting wearily to
them; forging political links across the European divide and so creating a
more hopeful relationship between East and West; using its influence as a

vital area of stability and democracy to strengthen democracy across the
world.
That is my vision.

It v/as also, incidentally, the vision on which we were to fight the
European Assembly elections later that year and do remarkably well,
winning 45 out of the 81 United Kingdom seats.
REFORMING COMMUNITY FINANCES:
BRITAIN’S BUDGET CONTRIBUTION
Before there was any hope of moving far towards those wider
objectives I had to get more understanding and support from other
Community heads of government for our position. The French
presidency of the first half of 1984 seemed to offer an opportunity
which must be grasped. The events in Athens the previous December
— where the only thing to record was disagreement — were widely
considered to have reduced Community negotiations to the level of
farce.* President Mitterrand was, I knew, someone who relished a
diplomatic success and would probably be prepared to sacrifice French
national interests — at least marginally — in order to secure one. In
January (in Paris) and in early March (at Chequers) I had talks with
him. In January Geoffrey Howe and I also discussed the Community
budget and other matters with the Italian Government in Rome. The
following month Chancellor Kohl and I held talks at No. 10. These
meetings were pleasant enough, but no clear undertakings were given.
The Foreign Affairs Councils — that is the meetings of Community
Foreign ministers — in February and March advanced matters no
further. But I was reasonably optimistic that the European Council in
Brussels, which I was to attend on Monday 19 and Tuesday 20 March,
might give us the lasting, satisfactory solution on the British budget
contribution which I wanted.
By the time I reached Brussels three possible ‘solutions’ to the
budget question had been advanced — one by the Commission
President, Gaston Thorn, one by the Germans, and one by the French
presidency. None was satisfactory to us, but all of them acknowledged
the principle behind our ‘threshold’ proposal at Athens — that a
country’s prosperity should be taken into account in determining its
net contribution. We were getting down to brass tacks. I was also glad
that President Mitterrand, unlike his Greek predecessor, had chosen a
more sensible order of discussion at the Council, beginning with the
issues of budget discipline and budget imbalances. After initial
discussion, officials went away to work on the text relating to the
budget while we moved on to the issue of increasing the Community’s
‘own resources’. On this, the line-up was predictable. The President of
the Commission wanted an increase in the current VAT ceiling, not
just to 1.4 per cent but to a minimum of 1.6 per cent. Garret
FitzGerald wanted a minimum of 1.8 per cent. President Mitterrand

suggested 1.6 per cent. Chancellor Kohl and I would have none of this:
1.4 per cent was as far as we could possibly go — and that was only
after other matters relating to the budget and agricultural spending
had been satisfactorily resolved.
The Council was due to meet again at about 11 o’clock the next
morning. President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl had a working
breakfast — something which was to become a feature of European
Councils because it was widely and probably accurately believed that
these were the occasion of the Franco-German deals which heavily
influenced or in some cases virtually determined the outcome of the
Council. I met President Mitterrand after his meeting with Chancellor
Kohl and gained the impression that we were heading for a successful
outcome.
When the heads of government reconvened later that morning the
session began with a gush of Euro-idealism. Chancellor Kohl and
President Mitterrand became quite lyrical on the subject of getting rid
of frontier controls, which they seemed to invest with a high symbolic
significance. Then President Mitterrand urged that Europe should not
be left behind by the USA in the space race. The Italian Foreign
minister became still more enthusiastic, urging that Europe should be
in the vanguard of moves against the ‘militarization of space’. It
seemed to me that it would be more sensible to concentrate on sorting
out the Community budget first and at last we got down to business.
Now the high-mindedness quickly disappeared. The Irish Prime
Minister tried and failed to gain a special exemption from the
measures to limit milk production that the rest of us wanted. He
promptly invoked the Luxemburg compromise and walked out. At 4
p.m. there was a long adjournment in order to study a new text of the
draft communiqué. On resuming, we discussed once again the
budgetary problems. The Italians and the Greeks stood out against
giving Britain any permanent agreement to reduce our net budget
contributions; more serious for us, President Mitterrand seemed to side
with them. I intervened to say that I had fought this battle for five
years and that I intended to have a system which was fair and which
would last. At this point — whether spontaneously or by previous
agreement with President Mitterrand I do not know — Chancellor
Kohl upped and offered Britain a 1,000 million ecus rebate for five
years — much less than I wanted and still only a temporary
arrangement. Almost immediately France and the others agreed with
Germany. I found myself isolated. I refused to accept his proposal.
Nothing more could be done. No agreed communiqué was issued. To
rub salt into the wound, France and Italy at a Foreign Affairs Council
immediately after the heads of government summit broke up blocked
payment of our 1983 refund.
I had not expected such a totally negative outcome. So the question
immediately arose as to whether we should withhold payments to the
Community budget. This was partly a legal and partly a political

question. We had always been advised that if we withheld
contributions we would almost certainly lose any subsequent case
before the European Court. In this instance, however, we were on
somewhat stronger legal ground because the Community was
withholding rebate payments to which we were entitled by previous
agreement. Probably, we would have lost the case anyway. But it
might have been politically worth fighting — that is we might have
thus secured a favourable compromise — if we had enjoyed the united
backing of the Parliamentary Party. Unfortunately, there was a hard
core of Euro-enthusiasts on the Tory back-benches who instinctively
supported the Community in any dispute with Britain. Though a clear
minority, they robbed us of the advantages of unity. So as on previous
occasions, I decided not to go down the path of withholding
contributions. And we had other cards to play.
On the basic question of whether I had been right to refuse what
was on offer there was little dispute. A letter I received from one
parliamentary colleague began:
Glory Glory Halleluia and many congratulations on your courageous and
absolutely correct stand at the EEC summit tonight.

Apart from my own summits with the other European heads of
government in the run up to important Councils, I always received upto-the-minute reports from our embassies and officials on what could
be deduced of the private intentions of other governments and the
state of public and press opinion in their countries. The two crucial
players would be France — which still held the presidency — and
Germany. Before the European Assembly election campaign got under
way I tried to persuade President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl to
agree to sort out the budget. In this I was certainly being a ‘better’
European than they were: for public opinion in Britain was all for
intransigence. But I suspect that the French President, at least, was not
minded to reach a deal until the elections had come and gone. My
attempts failed.
As the Council approached it still seemed to us that President
Mitterrand had not yet finally decided between two possible courses of
action — a solution which would be a diplomatic triumph for France
(in the chair) or a failure which would all be down to ‘Perfidious
Albion’. Whatever his private political calculations, the French
President was also now publicly calling for yet another ‘relaunch’ of
the Community, something which was music to Chancellor Kohl’s ears.
So when we prepared our own paper on the Community’s future for
the forthcoming summit, I accepted that it should be liberally
sprinkled with communautaire phrases.
The French President’s intentions continued to be unclear. Whether
the French themselves were confused or whether these were tactics
designed to confuse us in the best tradition of Gallic gamesmanship we
could not yet tell. A number of apparently unco-ordinated French

ideas to settle the budget were in circulation; which, if any, had the
President’s own support was unknown. Then on the eve of the Council,
President Mitterrand departed for Moscow with an air of nonchalance,
which may itself have been an aspect of psychological warfare.
What would the German position be? There were some reasons for
optimism. It seemed that Chancellor Kohl was now definitely anxious
for a successful summit. At Brussels, where he had been blamed for the
failure of the budget negotiations, he had learnt the danger of taking
ill-thought-out initiatives. We thought that he would support the
French presidency and that he would probably be willing to agree to a
better deal for Britain than he had proposed at Brussels. The most
encouraging consideration was that he needed the Community’s
agreement to enable him to provide a politically necessary subsidy for
his farmers — and for Chancellor Kohl domestic political
considerations always came first. As by far the largest net contributors
to the Community, the Germans wanted both to set a limit to their
contributions — as we did — and to ensure that they did not finish up
paying for the whole of our own rebate. But they were surprisingly
vague on how precisely to achieve this.
THE FONTAINEBLEAU EUROPEAN COUNCIL
The European Council was held at Fontainebleau, just outside Paris, on
Monday 25 and Tuesday 26 June. On the short flight in the And-over
from Northolt to Orly I finalized our tactics. Geoffrey Howe and I
shared the same analysis. We wanted an agreement at this meeting but
only if it was close enough to our terms. We had our reasons. After
France the presidency would go to Ireland which would be no
improvement — indeed worse because the French themselves, for the
reasons I have outlined, were likely to be more difficult when they
were not in the chair. Moreover, we had no agreement on rebates for
the current year, nor for the future; and our 1983 refund of 750
million ecus (£400 million) was still being held up. I was prepared to
accept, if necessary, a different formula from that which we had
advanced, but the money rebated must be enough and the
arrangement had to be lasting.
I arrived at lunchtime at the Château of Fontainebleau to be met by
President Mitterrand and a full guard of honour. The French know
how to do these things properly. Whereas Versailles provided the
heads of government with an experience of the splendour of France in
the Grand Siècle, Fontainebleau — the creation of Francis I who vied
with our own Henry VIII on the famous Field of Cloth of Gold —
represents the height of French Renaissance culture. Lunch took place
in the Château’s Hall of Columns and then we went through into the
Ballroom, which was heavily disguised by interpreters’ booths, for the
first session of the Council. Without any warning, President Mitterrand
asked me to open the proceedings by summing up the results of the

recent economic summit in London. Others then joined in to give their
own views and two hours elapsed. I started to fidget. Were these just
delaying tactics? At last we got on to the budget. Again I opened,
demonstrating what I thought unsatisfactory about the other schemes
which had been put forward to provide a solution and argued for our
own ideas of a formula. There was further discussion. Then President
Mitterrand remitted the matter to the Foreign ministers to discuss later
in the evening. Our meeting now returned to generalities, in particular
President Mitterrand’s lively account of his recent visit to Moscow.
That evening we drove back along the road through the forest to our
hotel at Barbizon. This little village attracts artists and gastronomes.
Anyone who has eaten at the local Hôtellerie du Bas-Bréau will know
why: the food was simply delicious.* Over dinner I was wondering
what the Foreign ministers were going to come up with. As we drank
our coffee, we saw that the Foreign ministers were taking theirs
outside on to the terrace and naturally concluded that they had done
their work. Far from it. It appeared that over dinner the French
Foreign minister, M. Cheysson, had been regaling his colleagues with
his own recollections of Moscow. President Mitterrand did not conceal
his displeasure and the Foreign ministers quickly went inside again to
get down to discussing the budget.
For our part, the heads of government spent some time discussing
the future of the Community. We got on to the question of the number
of commissioners once enlargement to take in Spain and Portugal had
occurred. I was alone in being prepared to settle for one commissioner
per country so as to reduce the number from sixteen to twelve. I asked
M. Thorn (with whom I often saw eye to eye — he did not have the
grandiose ambitions and bureaucratic leanings of his successor)
whether there was really enough work for seventeen commissioners.
He said no. But my colleagues from France, Germany and Italy were
not prepared to reduce their representation. So the Commission ended
up with the full complement — and the devil makes work for idle
hands.
At about 11.30 p.m. M. Cheysson emerged once more to tell us that
the Foreign ministers had ‘clarified the points of difference’. In fact,
the French had apparently managed to persuade the Foreign ministers
to favour a rebate system giving us back a simple percentage of our
net contribution. On such a percentage system there would be no link
between net contributions and relative prosperity — unlike the
‘threshold’ system we had been arguing for. We had privately
envisaged that this is how matters might eventually turn out.
But a percentage of what? Everyone could agree that it would be a
percentage of the gap between the sums we paid into the Community
and the sums we received from it. The French proposed in calculating
our contributions to take into account only those payments to the
Community that Britain made under VAT. That formula, however,
ignored the considerable sums we also contributed through tariffs and

levies. All our previous proposals had been based on this larger sum,
but in the end we had to accept the calculation based on VAT.
And, finally, how big a percentage would the rebate be? If we were
to drop the threshold idea — and therefore any link between net
contribution and prosperity — it would need to be pretty big. Indeed, I
had in mind a figure of well over 70 per cent. But it seemed from the
Foreign ministers’ meeting that we were now likely to be offered at
most something between 50 and 60 per cent with a temporary twoyear sweetener that would bring the refund up to 1000 million ecus a
year for the first two years. How Geoffrey, who had been splendidly
staunch in the negotiations so far, had allowed the Foreign ministers
to reach such a conclusion I could not understand.

I was in despair. I told the heads of government that Britain had
never been treated fairly from the beginning: I was not prepared to go
back to talking about a temporary sum: if this was the best they had to
offer the Fontainebleau Council would be a disaster.
Geoffrey, civil servants and I then met to discuss what should be
done. Our officials — who, I knew, had the brains, experience and
determination required to retrieve something from this débâcle — set
to work with their opposite numbers all through the night and into the
early morning. As a result of their efforts, the next day began a great
deal better than the previous one had ended.
President Mitterrand’s and Chancellor Kohl’s breakfast the following
morning probably cleared the way for a settlement. President
Mitterrand opened the formal session by saying that we must try for
an agreement on the budget, but if we had not succeeded by
lunchtime we should go on to other things. I made it clear that I was
now ready to negotiate on the basis of a percentage agreement, but I
held my ground for a figure of over 70 per cent. Quite soon, and
sensibly, President Mitterrand adjourned the main session so that
bilateral meetings could take place.
How hard should I hold out on the figure? As I have said, there were
good reasons for my wanting a settlement now. And with the
Community running right up against the financial buffers of the 1 per
cent VAT ceiling (on raising which they knew we had a veto) there
were equally good reasons for other Community members to be
cooperative. I saw President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl
separately. At this stage the French President would not move above
60 per cent. Chancellor Kohl would go as far as 65 per cent. I carefully
appraised the situation and came to the conclusion that I could obtain
a deal on the basis of a two-thirds refund. But I was determined to get
the full 66 per cent. It was only when the full session resumed that I
managed to do so. I said that it would be absurd to deny me my 1
percentage point. The French President smiled and said: ‘Of course,
Madame Prime Minister, you must have it.’ And so the agreement was
reached.

Or almost. When the agreement was being drafted an attempt was
made to exclude the costs of enlargement from this refund
arrangement. I resisted this fiercely and won. The heads of
government also agreed to release our 1983 refund.
Immediately, Chancellor Kohl raised his point about a special
subsidy for his farmers. He said that as Germany had facilitated the
budget settlement by providing the greater part of the money, he felt
he was entitled to subsidize his own farmers, in effective
contravention of the CAP. This did not please the Dutch because they
would in practice have to subsidize their farmers to the same extent;
but the Netherlands had neither the stomach nor the strength to
oppose Germany. So Chancellor Kohl got his way.

After more argument, principally between me and Garret FitzGerald,
about how to deal with the already overspent 1984 Community
budget, President Mitterrand wound up the conference and we retired
to a late lunch in high spirits because the deadlock on the budget had
been broken.
At my press conference and at the time of my later statement to the
House of Commons on the outcome of Fontainebleau there was some
criticism that I had not got more. But the crucial achievement was to
have gained a settlement which would last as long as the increased
‘own resources’ from the new 1.4 per cent VAT ceiling itself lasted. Of
course, in a sense that was not ‘permanent’: but it meant that I would
not have to go back every year to renegotiate the rebate until the new
VAT limit ran out, and that when it did so I would be in just as strong
a position as I had been at Fontainebleau to veto any extra ‘own
resources’ unless I had a satisfactory deal on Britain’s budget
contribution. More generally, the resolution of this dispute meant that
the Community could now press ahead both with the enlargement and
with the Single Market measures which I wanted to see. In every
negotiation there comes the best possible time to settle: this was it.
ENLARGEMENT OF THE COMMUNITY
It had generally been expected that once we and the Germans had
agreed to increase the Community’s ‘own resources’ the admission of
Spain and Portugal would run fairly smoothly. In fact it took two
European Councils at Dublin and at Brussels to sort it out. The Irish
having assumed the Community presidency, the Dublin Council was
set for Monday 3 and Tuesday 4 December. I was always the odd ‘man’
out on such occasions simply because as the IRA’s prime political
target I had to be surrounded by especially tight security. The Irish
Government and Army went to great lengths to achieve this and I
always expressed my gratitude to them for it. But I could barely
venture out of Dublin Castle, where I would stay, helicoptering back
and forth only as strictly necessary.

At least on this occasion it was not Britain but Greece which was
marked out as the villain of the piece — and with some justice. The
two outstanding issues as regards the terms for Spain’s and Portugal’s
entry had turned out to be wine and fish, on both of which the Iberian
countries were heavily dependent. The negotiations seemed to be
nearing a mutually satisfactory conclusion. It was at this point that Mr
Papandreou, the left-wing Greek Prime Minister, suddenly treated us
to some classical theatre. A charming and agreeable man in private,
his whole persona changed when it was a question of getting more
money for Greece. He now intervened, effectively vetoing enlargement
unless he received an undertaking that Greece should be given huge
sums over the next six years. The occasion for this arose as a result of
discussions which had been going on for some time about an
‘Integrated Mediterranean Programme’ of assistance, from which
Greece would be the main beneficiary. It seems that the Greeks’
appetite had been further whetted by unauthorized discussion of large
sums within the Commission. Mr Papandreou’s statement threw the
Council into disarray. Everyone resented not just the fact that Greece
was holding us to ransom, nor even the particular tactics used, but still
more the fact that, though Greece had been accepted into the
Community precisely to entrench its restored democracy, the Greeks
would not now allow the Community to do exactly the same for the
former dictatorships of Spain and Portugal.
As it happened I talked to Sr. Felipe González, the Spanish Prime
Minister, when we were both in Moscow for Mr Chernenko’s funeral
the following March. Sr. González, whom I liked personally however
much I disagreed with his socialism, was indignant about the terms
being offered Spain for entry into the Community. I had a good deal of
sympathy with him. I had earlier stressed to President Mitterrand just
how vital it was to get Spain and Portugal in quickly and not let shortterm selfish considerations stand in the way of what must be done to
strengthen democracy in Europe. But I now cautioned Sr. Gonzalez
against holding out for better terms, which I doubted he would get. I
said it was better to argue the case from within. For whatever reason,
he accepted the advice and at the otherwise fairly uneventful Brussels
Council the following month, chaired by Italy, negotiations for the
entry of Spain and Portugal were effectively completed. There would
be a special bonus to Britain in having Spain in because she would
over time have to dismantle discriminatory tariffs against our car
imports, which had long been a source of irritation in the motor
industry.
But the Greek Danegeld had to be paid. I was alone in Brussels in
arguing vigorously against the size of the bill we were presented for
the ‘Integrated Mediterranean Programmes’. The Germans seemed
strangely reluctant to defend their own financial interests and refused
our attempts made at ministerial and official level to set up a working
partnership with them. Even France and Italy turned out to be net

contributors. Greece could expect a bonanza.
At Brussels I also launched an initiative on deregulation designed to
provide impetus to the Community’s development as a free trade and
free enterprise area. It was intended to fit in with our own economic
policy: I have never understood why some Conservatives seem to
accept that free markets are right for Britain but are prepared to
accept dirigisme when it comes wrapped in the European flag. In my
statement to the Council, I employed a little ridicule to make my point
about the way in which directives spewed forth from Brussels. I noted
that the Treaty of Rome was a charter for economic liberty and we
must not allow ourselves to change it into a charter for thousands of
minor regulations. We should seek to cut the bureaucracy on business
and see that labour markets worked properly so as to create jobs.
Some Community legislation had been amended up to forty times: we
should think what this meant for the small trader. I pointed to a large
pile of directives in front of me on VAT and company law. There had
been fifty-nine new regulations in 1984. Of these my three favourites
were: a draft directive on sludge in agriculture; a draft directive on
trade in mincemeat; and a draft directive amending the main
regulation on the common organization of the market in goat meat.
I received a good deal of support for the initiative; but of course it
was for the Commission — the source of the problem — to follow it
through. It would take more than this modestly useful gesture to
change the way the Commission worked: and soon we would entrust
still further powers to it.
It was at Brussels that the new Commission was approved with M.
Delors as its President. At the time, all that I knew was that M. Delors
was extremely intelligent and energetic and had, as French Finance
minister, been credited with reining back the initial left-wing socialist
policies of President Mitterrand’s Government and with putting French
finances on a sounder footing. The French socialist is an extremely
formidable animal. He is likely to be highly educated, entirely selfassured, a dirigiste by conviction from a political culture which is
dirigiste by tradition. Such was M. Delors.
I nominated Lord Cockfield as the new British European
Commissioner. I was no longer able to find a place for him in the
Cabinet and I thought that he would be effective in Brussels. He was. I
always paid tribute to the contribution he made to the Single Market
programme. Arthur Cockfield was a natural technocrat of great ability
and problem-solving outlook. Unfortunately, he tended to disregard
the larger questions of politics — constitutional sovereignty, national
sentiment and the promptings of liberty. He was the prisoner as well
as the master of his subject. It was all too easy for him, therefore, to go
native and to move from deregulating the market to reregulating it
under the rubric of harmonization. Alas, it was not long before my old
friend and I were at odds.

In retrospect, the Dublin and Brussels summits had been an
interlude — even if a lively one — between the two great issues which
dominated Community politics in these years — the budget and the
Single Market. The Single Market — which Britain pioneered — was
intended to give real substance to the Treaty of Rome and to revive its
liberal, free trade, deregulatory purpose. I realized how important it
was to lay the groundwork in advance for this new stage in the
Community’s development.
The pressure from most other Community countries, from the
European Commission, from the European Assembly and from
influential figures in the media for closer European co-operation and
integration was so strong as to be almost irresistible. But what kind of
integration? My aim had to be to ensure that we were not driven
helter-skelter towards European federalism. The thrust of the
Community should be towards achieving the genuine Common Market
envisaged in the original treaty, a force for free trade not
protectionism. To do this I would have to seek alliances with other
governments, accept compromises and use language which I did not
find attractive. I had to assert persuasively Britain’s European
credentials while being prepared to stand out against the majority on
issues of real significance to Britain. Such an approach was never
going to be easy.
THE MILAN EUROPEAN COUNCIL
I hoped that a significant first step would be the paper which Geoffrey
Howe and I worked up for the Milan Council, hosted and chaired by
Italy, on Friday 28 and Saturday 29 June. The language and direction
of this paper were ostentatiously communautaire. It covered four areas:
the completion of the Common Market, strengthened political
cooperation, improvements in decision-making and better exploitation
of high technology. The most significant element was that dealing with
‘political co-operation’, which in normal English means foreign policy.
The aim was closer co-operation between Community member states,
which would nonetheless reserve the right of states to go their own
way.
At that time there seemed a number of good reasons for this
approach. The Falklands War had demonstrated to me how valuable it
would be if all Community members were prepared to commit
themselves to supporting a single member in difficulties. President
Mitterrand had been a staunch ally: but some of the other members of
the Community had wavered and the instincts of one or two were
downright hostile. Even more important perhaps was the need for
western solidarity in dealing with the eastern bloc. Foreign policy cooperation within the European Community would help strengthen the
West, as long as good relations with the United States remained
paramount. What I did not want to do, however, was to have a new

treaty grafted on to the Treaty of Rome. I believed that we could
achieve both closer political co-operation — as well as make progress
towards a Single Market — without such a treaty; and all my instincts
warned me of what federalist fantasies might appear if we opened this
Pandora’s box.
I was keen to secure agreement for our approach well before the
Milan Council. So when Chancellor Kohl came to see me for an
afternoon’s talks at Chequers on Saturday 18 May I showed him the
paper on political co-operation and said that we were thinking of
tabling it for Milan. I said that what I wanted was something quite
separate from the Treaty of Rome, basing co-operation on an
intergovernmental agreement. Chancellor Kohl seemed pleased with
our approach and in due course I also sent a copy to France. Imagine
my surprise, then, when just before I was to go to Milan I learnt that
Germany and France had tabled their own paper, almost identical to
ours. Such were the consequences of prior consultation.
The ill-feeling this created was, in its way, an extraordinary
achievement, given the fact that nearly all of us had come there with a
view to proceeding in roughly the same direction. Matters were not
helped by the chairmanship of the Italian Prime Minister, Bettino
Craxi. Sig. Craxi, a socialist, and his Foreign minister, the Christian
Democrat Sig. Andreotti, were political rivals but they shared a joint
determination to call an Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC). Such a
conference, which could be called by a simple majority vote, would be
necessary if there were to be changes in the Treaty of Rome, which
themselves, however, would have to be agreed by unanimity. An IGC
seemed to me unnecessary (as I said) and dangerous (as I thought).
Quite what the French and Germans wanted was unclear — beyond
their desire for a separate treaty on political co-operation. They
certainly wanted more moves towards European ‘integration’ in
general and it had to be likely that they would want an IGC if one
were attainable as — for reasons I shall explain shortly — it was. It is
also possible that some kind of secret agreement had been reached on
this before the Council began. Certainly when I had a bilateral meeting
with Sig. Craxi early on Friday morning he could not have been more
sweetly reasonable; an IGC was indeed mentioned as a possibility, but
I made it very clear that I thought that the relevant decisions could
largely be taken at the present Council without the postponement
inevitable if a full IGC were to be called. I came away thinking how
easy it had been to get my points across.
It is worth recalling just how the pressure for an IGC had built up in
the first place. A year earlier, in one of those gestures which seem to
be of minor significance at the time but adopt a far greater one in the
light of events, we had agreed (at Fontainebleau) to set up an ad hoc
committee under the chairmanship of the Irish Senator James Dooge
to suggest improvements in European co-operation. Some of the
committee’s proposals were sensible, such as its stress on more

effective political co-operation and a Single Market; some were
objectionable like the ‘achievement of a European social area’, which
prefigured the approach of the later Social Charter; and some were
plainly dotty, such as the promotion of ‘common cultural values’. But
above all the Dooge Committee proposed an IGC to ratify all its
proposed treaty amendments with a view to the creation of a
‘European Union’. So such a proposal was inevitably on the table at
Milan. And once this happened the proposed IGC seemed the perfect
vehicle for almost everyone else’s particular ideas about European
development. This made it difficult to resist.
It was, in fact, Sig. Craxi himself as President who suggested at the
Council that we should have an IGC. Battle lines were quickly drawn. I
argued that the Community had demonstrated that it did have the
capacity to take decisions under the present arrangements and that we
should now at the Milan Council agree upon the measures needed to
make progress on the completion of the Common Market internally
and political co-operation externally. There would, I granted, be a
need for improved methods of decision-taking if these ends were to be
met. I proposed that we agree now to greater use of the existing
majority voting articles of the Rome Treaty, while requiring any
member state which asked for a vote to be deferred to justify its
decision publicly. I called for a reduction in the size of the Commission
to twelve members. I also circulated a paper suggesting some modest
ways in which the European Assembly might be made more effective. I
suggested that the Luxemburg European Council, due to meet in
December, should as necessary constitute itself as an IGC. There
agreements could be signed and conclusions endorsed. But I did not
see any case for a special IGC working away at treaty changes in the
meantime.
But it was to no avail. Having come to Milan in order to argue for
closer co-operation I found myself being bulldozed by a majority
which included a highly partisan chairman. I was not alone: Greece
and Denmark joined me in opposing an IGC. Geoffrey Howe would
have agreed to it. His willingness to compromise reflected partly his
temperament, partly the Foreign Office’s déformation professionelle. But
it may also have reflected the fact that Britain’s membership of the
European Community gave the Foreign Office a voice in every aspect
of policy that came under the Community. And the more the
Community moved in a centralized direction the more influential the
Foreign Office became in Whitehall. Inevitably, perhaps, Geoffrey had
a slightly more accommodating view of federalism than I did.
In any case, to my astonishment and anger Sig. Craxi suddenly now
called a vote and by a majority the Council resolved to establish an
IGC. My time — not just at the Council but all of those days of work
which preceded it — had been wasted. I would have to return to the
House of Commons and explain why all of the high hopes which had
been held of Milan had been dashed. And I had not even had an

opportunity while there to go to the opera.
SINGLE MARKET-MINDEDNESS
Annoyed as I was with what had happened, I realized that we must
make the best of it. I made it clear that we would take part in the IGC:
I saw no merit in the alternative policy — practised for a time in
earlier years by France — of the so-called ‘empty chair’. There has to
be a major matter of principle at stake to justify any nation’s refusing
to take part in Community discussions. That was not the case here: we
agreed with the aims of enhanced political co-operation and the Single
Market; we disagreed only with the means (i.e., the IGC) to effect
them. In general, too, I believed that it was better to argue our case at
the earlier stage, either in the Council or in the IGC, rather than in the
last ditch, when the proposal had become an amendment to the Treaty
of Rome. My calculations here, however, depended upon fair dealing
and good faith in discussions between heads of government and with
the Commission. As time went on, I had reason to question both.
There now followed an apparently endless stream of meetings and
texts in preparation for the European Council which would meet at
Luxemburg in December. The reports of some of these discussions,
which I read, illustrated how widely differing were the objectives of
different participants. M. Delors urged fulfilment of what he had
described as the ‘two great dreams’ for Europe — an area without
frontiers and monetary union. Every exemption or derogation which
other countries, like Britain, sought seemed to be regarded as a kind of
betrayal. I was told that at one time or another he had denounced
almost every member state except Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands.
The second prize for overambition had to go to the Italians. Sig.
Craxi and Sig. Andreotti had come to regard the expansion of the
powers of the European Assembly as the touchstone of their federalist
principles. They wanted to give the assembly a power of ‘co-decision’
with the Council, something which would have effectively paralysed
the Community by subjecting heads of government to perpetual
interference by this incohate, inexperienced and frequently
irresponsible body.
The smallest European countries were really aiming at the fastest
and — for them — cheapest route to European economic and political
union and so were likely to go along with any moves in that direction
which did not alienate the Germans and the French. It was all summed
up in a letter to me from M. Jacques Santer, the Prime Minister of tiny
Luxemburg, which would host the Council. He urged that we should
‘recall our great objective of monetary and economic union’, and
added: ‘a resolutely ambitious attitude will without doubt allow us to
achieve stimulating results and provide a starting point for the
economic and psychological changes which are essential as Europe
assumes its new role.’ We in the British delegation were inclined to

dismiss such rhetoric as cloudy and unrealistic aspirations which had
no prospect of being implemented. We were correct in believing them
to be lacking in realism; where we were mistaken was in
underestimating the determination of some European politicians to put
them into effect.
More important to British calculations at the time was what the
French and Germans wanted out of it all. By now, the Franco-German
axis was again as strong as it had been under President Giscard and
Chancellor Schmidt. President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl, in
contrast to their predecessors, had little in common personally.
Chancellor Kohl has the sure touch of a German provincial politician,
which has always stood him well politically. Only recently — since
German reunification in fact — has he struck out with a distinctive
German foreign policy. For most of the 1980s, he seemed willing to
subordinate German interests to French guidance, since this reassured
Germany’s neighbours. Furthermore as a Christian Democrat, he is
more of the social than of the economic Right and so sees the world
from a perspective far closer to that of the Socialist President of France
than would any British Conservative. President Mitterrand is
cultivated and cosmopolitan, but somewhat aloof in French domestic
politics. Like so many Frenchmen of his generation, he is driven by a
fear of the consequences of German domination. But, whatever he said
to me in private, his public line and his actions would for this very
reason always be directed towards keeping the Germans bound into
the European Community, where the French might be able to exercise
greater influence over them. Consequently, I knew that the French
attitude at the forthcoming Council would be to press hard for closer
‘European Union’, since this is the phrase which allows both nations to
pursue their own national interests with respectability. These trends
were, as I shall describe, to become still more important as time went
by.
I had one overriding positive goal. This was to create a single
Common Market. The Community’s internal tariffs on goods had been
abolished by July 1968. At the same time it had become a customs
union, which Britain had fully accepted in July 1977. What remained
were the so-called ‘non-tariff’ barriers. These came in a great variety of
more or less subtle forms. Different national standards on matters
ranging from safety to health, regulations discriminating against
foreign products, public procurement policies, delays and
overelaborate procedures at customs posts — all these and many
others served to frustrate the existence of a real Common Market.
British businesses would be among those most likely to benefit from an
opening-up of other countries’ markets. For example, we were more or
less effectively excluded from the important German insurance and
financial services markets where I knew — as I suspect did the
Germans — that our people would excel. Transport was another
important area where we were stopped from making the inroads we

wanted. The price which we would have to pay to achieve a Single
Market with all its economic benefits, though, was more majority
voting in the Community. There was no escape from that, because
otherwise particular countries would succumb to domestic pressures
and prevent the opening-up of their markets. It also required more
power for the European Commission: but that power must be used in
order to create and maintain a Single Market, rather than to advance
other objectives.
I knew that I would have to fight a strong rear-guard action against
attempts to weaken Britain’s own control over areas of vital national
interest to us. I was not going to have majority voting applying, for
example, to taxation which the Commission would have liked us to
‘harmonize’. Competition between tax regimes is far more healthy
than the imposition of a single system. It forces governments to hold
down government spending and taxation, and to limit the burden of
regulations; and when they fail to do these things, it allows companies
and taxpayers to move elsewhere. In any event, the ability to set one’s
own levels of taxation is a crucial element of national sovereignty. I
was not prepared to give up our powers to control immigration (from
non-EC countries), to combat terrorism, crime, and drug trafficking
and to take measures on human, animal and plant health, keeping out
carriers of dangerous diseases — all of which required proper frontier
controls. There was, I felt, a perfectly practical argument for this: as an
island — and one quite unused to the more authoritarian continental
systems of identity cards and policing — it was natural that we should
apply the necessary controls at our ports and airports rather than
internally. Again, this was an essential matter of national sovereignty,
for which a government must answer to its own Parliament and
people. I was prepared to go along with some modest increase in the
powers of the European Assembly, which would shortly and somewhat
inaccurately be described as a Parliament: but the Council of
Ministers, representing governments answerable to national
Parliaments, must always have the final say. Finally, I was going to
resist any attempt to make treaty changes which would allow the
Commission — and by majority vote the Council — to pile extra
burdens on British businesses.
Right up to the beginning of the Luxemburg Council I thought that
we could rely on the Germans to support us in opposing any mention
of the EMS and economic and monetary union in the revisions of the
treaty. Then, as now, however, there was an inherent tension between,
on the one hand, the German desire to retain control over their own
monetary policy to keep down inflation and, on the other, to
demonstrate their European credentials by pressing further towards
economic and monetary union.
I had discussed this with the Chancellor of the Exchequer and he
and I were at one. A few days before the Council began Nigel Lawson
set out his views with admirable clarity in a note urging me to stand

firm. He recalled that Chancellor Kohl had told me the previous day
that the Germans, like us, were totally opposed to any amendment to
the monetary provisions of the Treaty of Rome. But he added that if
the position deteriorated I would have to have some possible form of
words up my sleeve. Nigel stressed that it would be essential that the
language used should contain no obligation on us to join the ERM,
make it clear that exchange rate policy is the responsibility of national
authorities, minimize any extension of Community competence and
avoid any treaty reference to EMU. He concluded that having
reviewed the options he was bound to say that the better course by far
looked to be not to get caught up in this whole exercise. I agreed.
THE LUXEMBURG EUROPEAN COUNCIL
I arrived in Luxemburg at 10 o’clock on Monday morning, 2 December
1985. The first session of the Council began soon afterwards. The
heads of government went through the draft treaty — what would
become the Single European Act — which the presidency and the
Commission had drawn up. At first the discussion dragged on, with
several hours being spent on a single clause. The ability of those
present to argue at great length and with much repetition about
matters of little interest was, as ever, astonishing. It would have been
far better to have agreed on the principles and then let others deal
with the details, referring back to us. But of course it would have been
better if, as I had wanted originally, there had been no IGC, no new
treaty and just some limited practical agreements.
I was also dismayed that the Germans shifted their ground and said
that they were now prepared to include monetary matters in the
treaty. I was, however, able in a side discussion with Chancellor Kohl
to reduce the formula to what I considered insignificant proportions
which merely described the status quo, rather than set out new goals.
This added to the phrase ‘Economic and Monetary Union’ the
important gloss ‘co-operation in economic and monetary policy’. The
former had been the official objective, unfortunately, since October
1972: the latter, I hoped, would signal the limits the act placed on it.
But this formulation delayed M. Delors’s drive to monetary union only
briefly.
Perhaps even those heads of government with the most insatiable
thirst for Euro-jargon had become a little bored after the first day.
Certainly, Tuesday’s discussions, though long and intense, were far
more productive. It was midnight when I gave my press conference on
the conclusions of the Council. I was pleased with what had been
achieved. We were on course for the Single Market by 1992. I had had
to make relatively few compromises as regards wording; I had
surrendered no important British interest; I had had to place a
reservation on just one aspect of social policy in the treaty.* Italy,
which had insisted on the IGC in the first place, had not only applied

the most reservations on it but also demanded that it must be agreed
by the European Assembly.
Perhaps I derived most satisfaction from the inclusion in the official
record of the conference of a ‘general statement’ recording that:
Nothing in these provisions shall affect the right of member states to take
such measures as they consider necessary for the purpose of controlling
immigration from third countries, and to combat terrorism, crime, the traffic
in drugs and illicit trading in works of art and antiques.

I had insisted on the insertion of this statement. I said that otherwise
terrorists, drug dealers and criminals would exploit the provisions of
the act to their own advantage and to the danger of the public.
Without it I would not have agreed the Single European Act. In fact,
neither the Commission, nor the Council nor the European Court
would in the long run be prepared to uphold what had been agreed in
this statement any more than they would honour the limits on
majority voting set out in the treaty itself. But this is to anticipate.
The first fruits of what would be called the Single European Act
were good for Britain. At last, I felt, we were going to get the
Community back on course, concentrating on its role as a huge
market, with all the opportunities that would bring to our industries.
Advantages will indeed flow from that achievement well into the
future, even though harmonization and standardization regularly
threaten to become ends in themselves. The trouble was — and I must
give full credit to those Tories who warned of this at the time — that
the new powers the Commission received only seemed to whet its
appetite.
Even at the time different people had very different ideas of the
significance of what had been agreed at Luxemburg. M. Delors
described it as a ‘compromise of progress’, regretted that his proposal
for extra power for the European Assembly did not find favour, but
welcomed what had been said about monetary matters since he
regarded the ecu as ‘part of the European dream’. The Dutch, natural
federalists, were also disappointed. But some of them lived in hope. A
comment in one of the Dutch papers said that ‘the ideal of European
unity would have to wait until there was a new incumbent in No. 10.’
The Germans, rightly, saw that the momentum towards their objective
of European Union had been resumed. Welcoming the outcome,
Chancellor Kohl told the Bundestag that the Council had ‘taken the
political and institutional development of the Community a decisive
step forward’.
At the time I had a different view. Answering questions in the House
of Commons on the outcome of Luxemburg I said at one point:
I am constantly saying that I wish that they would talk less about European
and political union. The terms are not understood in this country. In so far as
they are understood over there, they mean a good deal less than some people
over here think they mean.

Looking back, I was wrong to think that. But I still believe it was
right to sign the Single European Act, because we wanted a Single
European Market.
European affairs took second place for me during the rest of this
Parliament, with just a few exceptions. The main decisions had been
made and even the Commission’s search for new ‘initiatives’ had been
slowed for the moment by the need to work out and implement the
Single Market programme. The Community was overspending its
resources, but had not yet reached the new limits of VAT revenue
which had been set. Enlargement had to be carried out. There was
plenty to be getting on with.
THE LONDON EUROPEAN COUNCIL
Britain took up the presidency and the European Council met in
London on Friday 5 and Saturday 6 December 1986. We were to meet
in the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre. The great expense and
unpleasing design of this building can only be justified by the
unsightliness of the original gaping hole — an overflow car park —
which it filled. I took a close interest in the physical as well as the
diplomatic preparations for our big summits. For example, I had
earlier had the swivel chairs around the big conference table at the
‘QE II’ replaced by light wooden ones: I always thought there was
something to be said for looking at your opposite number in the eye
without his being able to swivel sideways to escape. On this occasion I
took care to have the battleship-grey walls covered up with beige
hangings and pictures, deliberately having some drawings by Henry
Moore, borrowed from the Moore Foundation, placed opposite
President Mitterrand, who I knew loved Moore as much as I did.
Undoubtedly, the main achievement of the British presidency was
adoption of or agreement to a record number of measures to
implement the Single Market. This was the sort of solid progess the
Community needed, rather than flashy publicity-seeking initiatives
which came to nothing or just caused bad feeling.
But the London Council itself could only be a modest success. On the
way into dinner Chancellor Kohl had made it clear to my private
secretary, Charles Powell, that there was no question of Germany
being able to take major decisions on agriculture — the most vexed
question at this time — before their forthcoming elections. If nothing
dramatic could be accomplished on agriculture or the budget,
however, the Council was notable for the emergence of M. Delors as a
new kind of European Commission President — a major player in the
game. I had a brief foretaste of this at the first evening’s dinner, when,
to my surprise and unconcealed irritation, he used the discussion
period before dinner to launch into a long speech about the parlous
financial state in which the Community found itself as a result of the

CAP and to put forward a range of quite detailed suggestions. I replied
that we should have all been told this before: it was plain from what
he said that the Community was broke. I agreed that M. Delors should
visit European capitals, as he proposed, to try to find a solution. But
this sort of thing ought not to be repeated. I reflected to myself that no
one could have imagined a top British civil servant springing surprises
on ministers in this way: it illustrated all too well what was wrong
with the Commission — that it was composed of a new breed of
unaccountable politicians.
As President of the Community I had to give a press conference
reporting on the outcome, at which I was accompanied by M. Delors.
This time — again to my surprise — he refused to say anything, even
when I asked him to comment on one of my answers. I continued to
urge him, but to no avail. ‘I had no idea you were the strong silent
type,’ I remarked.
M. Delors soon broke his silence. Three days later I gave a speech
reporting on the presidency to the European Assembly in Strasbourg
on Tuesday 9 December. It could not have been more communautaire.
But when I sat down, M. Delors — a quite new M. Delors whom I had
never seen or heard before — began to speak. It was Euro-demagogy,
designed to play to the prejudices of his audience, to belittle the
British presidency and to ask for more money. I was not having this.
When he finished I stood up and demanded a right of reply —
something quite unknown, apparently, in this ‘Parliament’. Speaking
off the cuff, I answered the points which had been raised, as I would in
a wind-up speech in the House of Commons. And I did not fail to
observe how he had said none of this when he had had the chance at
the press conference we had held together. He came in late to the
lunch afterwards and took his place beside me. I told him then that
time after time I had stood up for his position in the House of
Commons, refusing to rule out extra money, even though under the
most intense pressure. Of one thing he could be sure, I said: that
would never happen again.
In the two years of European politicking that led up to the Single
European Act, I had witnessed a profound shift in how European
policy was conducted — and therefore in the kind of Europe that was
taking shape. A Franco-German bloc with its own agenda had reemerged to set the direction of the Community. The European
Commission, which had always had a yen for centralized power, was
now led by a tough, talented European federalist, whose philosophy
justified centralism. And the Foreign Office was almost imperceptibly
moving to compromise with these new European friends. We could, of
course, look to the veto, to legal safeguards, and to declared
exemptions. In the future, however, these would increasingly be
circumvented where they were not overthrown entirely.
*

For discussion of the Athens European Council, see Chapter 12, pp. 335–8.

I am a great collector of menus. For the connoisseur I reproduce the menu for dinner
on 25 June: Assortiment de foie gras d’oie; Homard breton rôti, beurre Cancalais; Carré
d’agneau aux petites girolles; Asperges tièdes; Fromages de la Brie et de Fontainebleau;
Soufflé chaud aux framboises; Mignardises et fours frais. All washed down with the finest
wines.
*

Britain and Ireland — as island countries — were permitted to retain or take new
measures on grounds of health, safety, environment and consumer protection.
*

CHAPTER XIX

Hat Trick
The preparations for and course of the 1987 general election campaign

All election victories look inevitable in retrospect; none in prospect.
The wounds which Westland, BL and reaction to the US raid on Libya
inflicted on the Government and the Conservative Party would take
some time to heal. Economic recovery would in time provide an
effective salve, as it became clear that our policies were delivering
growth with low inflation, higher living standards and — from the
summer of 1986 — steadily falling unemployment. But in the
meantime, Labour had developed a thirst for power, moderated their
image and gained a lead in the opinion polls. It was important that I
should unify the Party around my authority and vision of
Conservatism. This would not be easy.
STYLE AND TONE
Perhaps the most damaging accusation made against me during the
Westland affair was that I did not listen. Like most allegations which
stick, this contained a grain of truth. Once I begin to follow a train of
thought I am not easily stopped. This has its advantages. It means that
I can concentrate on a tricky point almost no matter what is going on
in the background, a useful ability, for example, at Prime Minister’s
Question Time. But it does, of course, also mean that I am inclined to
talk over people and ignore timid or inarticulate objections and
arguments. People who do not know me and how I work conclude that
I have not taken in what has been said to me. Those who know me
better will confirm, however, that this is generally not the case. I will
often go away afterwards to revise my views in the light of what I
have heard. Indeed, I have even been accused by some supporters of
taking too much notice of those who do not agree with me.
The suggestion that I do not listen, particularly when it comes from
ex-ministers, can, however, simply mean that I do not agree with their
views. You might say I ‘chair from the front’. I like to say what I think
quite early on and then see whether arguments are adduced which
show me to be wrong, in which case I have no difficulty in changing
my line. This is, of course, not the traditional formal way of chairing
meetings. My experience is that a group of men sitting round a table
like little better than their own voices and that nothing is more
distasteful than the possibility that a conclusion can be reached
without all of them having the chance to read from their briefs. My
style of chairmanship certainly nonplussed some colleagues, who knew

their brief a good deal less well than I did. But I adopt this technique
because I believe in argument as the best way of getting to the truth —
not because I want to suppress argument. In fact, I would go further:
nothing is more important to successful democratic government than
the willingness to argue frankly and forcefully — unless, perhaps, it is
the willingness to recognize collective responsibility when the decision
is made.
So I set in train a series of steps to make plain that the Government
encompassed — and was receptive to — a wide range of views. My
first concern was to deal with the impression — that was apparently
very widespread — that the Government was unaware of people’s
worries. I could do this without diluting the Thatcherite philosophy
because, whatever commentators imagined, the hopes and aspirations
of the great majority were in tune with my beliefs. It was because I did
listen to people that I knew this. But I never confused the leader page
of the Guardian with vox populi.
I used my speech to the Scottish Party Conference in Perth on Friday
16 May (1986) to stress that we were indeed listening to what people
were concerned about. And in some cases we had already acted to put
matters right. The Scots had been up in arms because of the effects of
the domestic rate revaluation, which had sent some people’s rates bills
soaring while others had apparently inexplicably dropped. So I
reminded the 1986 Scottish Conference:
A year ago, when I came to this same conference, you made clear your deep
worries about rates. We listened. We understood. We’re dealing with it. And
because of the urgency, domestic rates will be abolished in Scotland ahead of
England and Wales.

I went on to promise the same radical but sensitive approach to
people’s concerns in education, where there was much discontent, and
health where there was still more. I acknowledged:
There are genuine concerns. How long will your elderly relative have to wait
for the hip operation which will relieve so much pain? Will the expectant
mother be cared for by the same medical team throughout her pregnancy?…
I know your worries, and we are determined to deal with them…

What was important in this speech, and was remarked upon, was the
tone. Of course, it is never enough just to listen: you have to come up
with answers. But this was a time to demonstrate sensitivity and the
speech went down well.
RESHUFFLE
A second step towards getting the Government and Party off to a new
start was provided by the reshuffle a little later that month. Keith
Joseph had decided that he now wished to leave the Cabinet. The
departure of my oldest political friend and ally, indeed mentor,
saddened me. He was irreplaceable; somehow, politics would never be

the same again. But Keith’s departure gave rise to important changes.
What I needed was ministers who could fight battles in the media as
well as in Whitehall.
Any analysis of the opinion polls revealed that where we were
strong was on economic management; where we were weak was on
the so-called ‘caring issues’. There is nothing new about this. No
matter how unjust — and I personally resented the injustice because I
have always found no one more willing to give time and money
without reward than the typical Conservative — this is what was to be
expected. In Health I felt that the best answer was to set out the
record: but there was no evidence that it made much impact; indeed, it
was widely disbelieved. In Education, however, the Conservatives
were trusted because although people thought we would spend less
than Labour on schools they rightly understood that we were
interested in standards — academic and nonacademic — parental
choice and value for money; and they knew that Labour’s ‘loony Left’
had a hidden agenda of social engineering and sexual liberation. Ken
Baker had won hands-down the propaganda battle against the Left in
the local authorities and he and William Waldegrave, stimulated by
the advice of Lord Rothschild, had set out what I had long been
looking for — an alternative to the rates. But I felt that a first-class
communicator like Ken Baker was now needed at Education.
John Moore, who had done an excellent job pressing ahead the
privatization programme from the Treasury and was highly regarded
by Nigel Lawson, now entered the Cabinet as Transport Secretary. I
had high hopes of John. He was of my way of thinking. He was
conscientious, charming, soft spoken and in some ways he had the
strengths of Cecil Parkinson — that is, he was right-wing but not hard
or aggressive. He came across very well on television, where in the
subsequent election campaign he managed to be tough and sweetly
reasonable at the same time. I had no doubt that John Moore would be
an asset to the Government and a loyal supporter to me.
I moved Nick Ridley to the sprawling Department of the
Environment. Nick could not match Ken or John in presentation. But
we still needed to come up with some radical policies for our
manifesto and the third term. No one, I knew, was better suited to find
the right answers to the complicated issues which faced us in Nick’s
new field of responsibility. Housing was certainly one area which
required the application of a penetrating intellect. The sale of council
houses had led to a real revolution in ownership. But the vast, soulless
high rise council estates remained ghettoes of deprivation, poor
education and unemployment. The private rented sector too, in spite
of some liberalization through the shorthold, had continued to shrink,
holding back labour mobility. Housing benefit and housing finance
generally was a jungle, always threatening to swallow up the best laid
schemes. The community charge had to be thought through in detail
and implemented in England and Wales.* And further ahead lay the

vexed question of pollution of the environment.
Nick flourished at Environment. He was never popular with the
general public who saw what appeared to be a chain-smoking,
dishevelled, languid aristocrat; by contrast, he was the object of
universal respect and great affection from those who worked with him,
above all his officials. Nick had those virtues which seem only to be
cultivated in private: he was completely unaffected; he treated people
and arguments on their merits; he was incapable of guile; and he was
always seeking to take on the unrewarding and unpopular tasks.
On the evening of Thursday 24 July I spoke to the ‘22 Committee to
give the traditional ‘end of term’ address. This was always an
important occasion, but particularly so on this occasion. My task was
to ensure that the Parliamentary Party left in the past all the agonized
debates about Westland, BL and Libya and came back in the autumn
determined to demonstrate the unity and self-confidence required to
fight and win the arguments — and then a general election. There is
no point in telling back-bench politicians, who are in regular touch
with their constituents, that things are good when they are not. All
that achieves is to undermine confidence in you. So in an unvarnished
speech I told them that they had had to take a lot of difficulties on the
chin in the last year, but those difficulties had nothing to do with our
fundamental approach, which was correct. They had resulted from
throwing away the precious virtue of unity and also because, as over
Libya, we had had to do genuinely difficult things which were right. I
was glad to get warm and noisy applause for this, not simply because I
prefer applause to execration, but because such a warm response to
such a strong speech meant that the Party was recovering its nerve.
The summer of 1986 was important too in another regard. At
Conservative Central Office Norman Tebbit, the Chairman of the Party,
had been having a very hard time. As Norman used to say, he was the
‘lightning conductor’ for me. A good deal of criticism of Norman found
its way into the press and at one point he believed that it was coming
from me or my staff. Norman arrived one day at Downing Street
armed with a sheaf of critical press cuttings, asking where these
rumours came from. I was surprised to read these cuttings — my press
summary did not convey the flavour of these vicious attacks — but I
reassured Norman that they certainly did not come from me, or my
staff, nor — I emphasized strongly — did they reflect my views. These
tensions build up when people do not see one another frequently
enough to give vent to tensions and clear up misunderstandings: and
the civil service machine never likes to give enough time in diaries to
party political matters. Relations improved, I am glad to say, when
Stephen Sherbourne, my political secretary who understood politics as
well as any Cabinet minister and whose shrewdness never failed me,
ensured that Norman and I had regular weekly meetings.
THE STRATEGY GROUP AND POLICY GROUPS

My third step was to involve senior Cabinet ministers in the strategy
for the next election. In June Willie Whitelaw and John Wakeham, the
Chief Whip, sent me a memorandum urging me to set up the group of
ministers which was to be officially known as the Strategy Group and,
no doubt to the great pleasure of its male members, was soon known
by the press as the ‘A-Team’. Its purpose would be to plan for the next
election, discussing policy, presentation and tactics. I agreed that,
apart from Willie and John, the group should consist of Geoffrey
Howe, Nigel Lawson, Douglas Hurd and Norman Tebbit. I vetoed the
suggested inclusion of Peter Walker, and although I would have liked
to have Nick Ridley as a permanent member of the group, I decided
that it should be confined to the Deputy Prime Minister, the three
great offices of state, the Chairman of the Party and the Chief Whip.
Plainly, these had to be members. To have included other ministers
would have provoked the usual political jealousies and back biting.
Other colleagues, though, were invited when their departmental
responsibilities were under discussion. Since it was a political rather
than a government group it was serviced by Stephen Sherbourne and
Robin Harris, the Director of the Conservative Research Department.
As head of my Policy Unit, Brian Griffiths regularly attended too. The
group met on Monday mornings.
We began by looking through the programme of main events for the
week and the response they required. As we got nearer to the election
Norman Tebbit would often give us a brief report on the state of party
preparations. But the main item was usually a paper from a Cabinet
minister — either a permanent member of the group or another
colleague — on his departmental plans for the future. Several
ministers who today enjoy a reputation for radicalism had originally
arrived at our meetings with proposals that would not, as I would
privately put it, pull the skin off a rice pudding — and left with the
distinct feeling that much, much more was required of them.
At about the same time as the Strategy Group was established I set
up eleven party policy groups. On this occasion I made the chairman
of each group the Cabinet minister whose responsibilities covered its
area of interest. Apart from the obvious areas — the economy, jobs,
foreign affairs and defence, agriculture, the NHS — there were
separate groups on the family (under Nicholas Edwards, Welsh
Secretary) and young people (under John Moore — the nearest we had
in Cabinet to a young person). At least on this occasion, unlike 1983,
the groups were set up promptly and for the most part managed to
send in their reports on time. The fact that Cabinet ministers chaired
groups on their own areas meant, naturally, that even though outside
experts and back-benchers were members, the groups’ conclusions
bore an unremarkable similarity to the suggestions for policy
initiatives advanced by departments. As in 1983, however, their real
value was to make the Party feel fully involved in what was
happening. In this sense they were a counterpart to the Strategy Group

which served the same purpose as regards the Cabinet and
Government.
In general, the contents of the reports were not particularly exciting.
It is, though, worth noting that Nigel Lawson’s policy group, bearing
the unmistakable imprint of its chairman, advocated early entry into
the ERM (possibly even before the election which would have been
potentially disastrous), made no reference to the need to control public
borrowing and did not even mention his own invention, the MTFS,
which I regarded as the anchor for the whole of our economic
strategy. This approach never made its way into the manifesto, but
somehow it made its way into policy.
THE 1986 CONSERVATIVE PARTY CONFERENCE
None of us had any doubts about the importance of the 1986 Party
Conference in Bournemouth. This was likely, though not certain, to be
our last Party Conference before the general election. Labour’s
Conference the week before had been marked by highly professional
presentation which, though it deliberately subordinated substance to
public relations, was undoubtedly effective. Their device of
substituting a red rose for the red flag as their Party’s symbol,
impudent as it was, marked a shrewd understanding that whatever
else the electorate might vote for, it would not be socialism. Still, their
overconfidence persuaded the Labour leadership to offer a number of
hostages to fortune — notably a neutralist and anti-American defence
policy that was to leave them immensely vulnerable to our attacks in
the election campaign.
A temptation which Norman Tebbit and I found easy to resist was
that of trying to copy Labour tactics. One of the first rules of
campaigning is to play to your own strengths: only if these are
insufficient should you think about aping other people’s. This meant
that we must stress our record of achievement, not just by reeling off
figures but by portraying it as the basis for further progress — or, as
the slogan Norman picked for the conference had it, for ‘Our Next
Move Forward’. When Norman told me what he intended I was
impressed. In the late summer and early autumn he had pressed
ministers to come up with crisp statements of what had been achieved
and targets which should be met, preferably within a given time-span.
All of this material was cleared with the Treasury to see that there
were no hidden public expenditure implications. By the time that we
arrived at Bournemouth the material was ready and each day of the
conference was marked by practical policy announcements which the
media could not help but compare favourably with the glitzy Labour
Conference which preceded ours. Happily, the Bournemouth
Conference coincided with increasing evidence of prosperity, not least
the fall in unemployment. As a result it gave us a lift of morale and in
the polls which, in retrospect, set us on course for winning the next

election.
I took even more trouble with my speech at Bournemouth than on
other occasions. The very success of the speeches which the conference
had already heard made this a more difficult occasion. I had to sum up
but not to repeat: above all, I had to provide a theme which would fire
our people over the next few months.
Throughout the year I had collected in a file called ‘ideas for
speeches’ articles, speeches and different briefing and policy items
which came across my desk. Stephen Sherbourne and the Research
Department always provided me with a collection of the most
stimulating articles of the week. Stephen also put in for me copies of
speeches by those whose ideas he knew I particularly valued, such as
Nick Ridley, David Young and Nigel Lawson.
During the summer recess I would have a meeting to discuss the
general themes I should put across in my conference speech. Speech
contributions were commissioned from ministers, advisers, friendly
journalists, and academics. On this occasion we began speech writing
with no fewer than twelve separate contributions and two and a half
hefty files of background material. The weekend before the conference
different draft speech sections would be laid out and put together —
literally — along the table in the Great Parlour at Chequers. Linking
passages would be written and then the still disjointed and often
repetitive first draft would be typed up. Everyone breathed a sigh of
relief when they knew that we at least had a speech of some sort; even
though past experience suggested that this might bear little
relationship to the final text. Then would come the long hours of
refining and polishing until midnight (if we were lucky).
On the Friday morning I used to mark up the text with my own
special code, noting pauses, stress and where to have my voice rise or
fall. (I would familiarize myself with the speech using this text and
always have it with me, even though when I spoke it would be from
the Autocue tape.)
My task in this year’s speech was to provide a trailer to the
arguments on which we would fight the election and to give a
thematic unity to the various reforms of the ‘Next Move Forward’.
What would prove to be the single most important element in our
victory — namely the rising prosperity achieved by our economic
policies — was more a back-drop than a theme in the conference and
my speech. Our second campaign theme was foreshadowed in my
fierce attack on the Labour Party’s defence policy.
The Labour Conference had voted for a non-nuclear defence policy,
including the closure of American nuclear bases in the UK. Mr Kinnock
had also made it clear that there were no circumstances in which he
would ask the United States to use nuclear weapons in the defence of
Britain. This, of course, went further than Labour had ever done
before, because it meant that from the first day on which a Labour

government took power Britain would be regarded by the Soviets as
no longer under the American and NATO ‘nuclear umbrella’. I said:
Labour’s defence policy — though ‘defence’ is scarcely the word — is an
absolute break with the defence policy of every British Government since the
Second World War. Let there be no doubt about the gravity of that decision.
You cannot be a loyal member of NATO while disavowing its fundamental
strategy. A Labour Britain would be a neutralist Britain. It would be the
greatest gain for the Soviet Union in forty years. And they would have got it
without firing a shot.

But my main positive theme which was to be at the centre of our
manifesto too was contained in the section of my speech entitled
‘power to the people’. This drew attention to the wider home and
share ownership attendant on privatization and looked ahead to the
manifesto reforms of education and housing designed to give ordinary
people more choice in public services. I said:
The great political reform of the last century was to enable more and more
people to have a vote. Now the great Tory reform of this Century is to enable
more and more people to own property. Popular capitalism is nothing less
than a crusade to enfranchise the many in the economic life of the nation.
We Conservatives are returning power to the people.

When all is said and done, however, a speech is a theatrical as well
as a political event. Just before 2.30 p.m. on Friday 10 October I
walked onto the platform amid the usual uproar, which increased
when people saw that I was wearing a rose on my lapel. I began by
saying:
There is just one thing I would like to make clear. The rose I am wearing is
the rose of England.

ELECTION PREPARATIONS AND THE MANIFESTO
When Parliament reassembled the Party was in a quite different frame
of mind than it had been just a few months earlier. We had a brief
legislative programme on the advice of David Young, so crucial
legislation would not be abandoned if we went for an early election
the following summer. Our position in the opinion polls had begun to
improve. The Strategy Group and the policy groups were meeting
regularly. Norman kept me informed of the work which was going on
in Central Office to prepare for the election when it came. Already, on
2 July, he had given me a paper setting out his view of possible
election dates.
The compilation of documents which constitute the Party’s plans for
an election campaign is traditionally called the ‘War Book’. On 23
December Norman sent me the first draft ‘as a Christmas present’. I
was not unhappy to see the end of 1986 but I felt a new enthusiasm as
I considered the fresh policies and the battle for them which would be
required in 1987.

On Thursday 8 January I discussed with Norman and others the
papers he had sent me about the election campaign. We met at Alistair
McAlpine’s house in order to escape detection by the press, which had
already started to speculate about election dates. Many details of the
campaign had not been worked out as yet, but I found myself largely
in agreement with the suggestions. I did, however, have one
continuing worry; this was about the advertising. Several months
earlier I had asked whether Tim Bell, who had worked with me on
previous elections, could do so again now. I understood that he was a
consultant to Saatchis. But in fact the rift between them was greater
than I had imagined and the suggestion was never taken up. I might
have been prepared to insist, but this would have caused more
important problems with Norman and Central Office. In any case I
continued to see Tim socially. At this stage in January, though, I still
hoped that Saatchis would exhibit the political nous and creativity we
had had from them in the past.
I regarded the manifesto as my main responsibility. Brian Griffiths
and Robin Harris brought together in a single paper the proposals
which had come in from ministers and policy groups. We discussed
this at Chequers on Sunday 1 February. Nigel Lawson, Norman Tebbit
and Nick Ridley — in their different ways the three best brains of the
Cabinet — were there. It was as important at this stage to rule out as
to rule in different proposals: I like a manifesto which contains a
limited number of radical and striking measures, rather than irritating
little clutches of minor ones. It was at this meeting that the main
shape of the manifesto proposals became clear.
We agreed to include the aim of a 25 per cent basic rate of income
tax. We would not include a figure for the reduction of the top rate,
though we were thinking about a top rate of 50 per cent. I kept out of
the manifesto any commitment to transferable tax allowances between
husband and wife which, if they had been implemented along the lines
of the earlier green paper, would have been extremely expensive. I
commissioned further work on candidates for privatization which I
wanted to be spelt out clearly in the manifesto itself. Education would,
we all agreed, be one of the crucial areas for new proposals in the
manifesto. Largely as a result of work done by Brian Griffiths, I was
already clear what these should be. There must be a core curriculum
to ensure that the basic subjects were taught to all children. There
must be graded tests or benchmarks against which children’s
knowledge should be judged. All schools should have greater financial
autonomy. There must be a new per capita funding system which,
along with ‘open enrolment’,* would mean that successful, popular
schools were financially rewarded and enabled to expand. There must
be more powers for head teachers. Finally, and most controversially,
schools must be given the power to apply for what at this stage we
were describing as ‘direct grant’ status, by which we meant that they
could become in effect ‘independent state schools’ — a phrase that the

DES hated and kept trying to remove from my speeches in favour of
the bureaucratically flavoured ‘Grant-Maintained Schools’ — outside
the control of Local Education Authorities.
Housing was another area in which radical proposals were being
considered: Nick Ridley had already drawn up papers which were yet
to be properly discussed. But his main ideas — all of which eventually
found their way into the manifesto — were to give groups of tenants
the right to form tenants’ co-operatives and individual tenants the
right to transfer ownership of their house (or flat) to a housing
association or other approved institution — in other words to swap
landlords. Housing Action Trusts (HATs), modelled on the highly
successful Urban Development Corporations, were to be set up to take
over bad estates, renovate them and then pass them on to different
tenures and ownerships. We would also reform local authority housing
accounts to stop housing rents being used to subsidize the rate fund
when they should have gone towards repairs and renovation.
We were by now under a good deal of political pressure on the
Health Service and discussed at our meeting how to respond. However
good the record of the service as a whole, there was plenty of evidence
that it was not sufficiently sensitive to patients’ wishes, that there was
much inefficiency and that some areas and hospitals were performing
inexplicably worse than others, treating fewer patients etc. Norman
Fowler at the 1986 Party Conference had set out a number of targets,
backed up by special allocations of public spending, for increases in
the number of particular sorts of operation. This announcement had
gone well. I was reluctant to add the Health Service to the list of areas
in which we were proposing fundamental reform — not least because
not enough work had yet been done on it. The NHS was seen by many
as a touchstone for our commitment to the welfare state and there
were obvious dangers of coming forward with new proposals out of
the blue. The direction of reform which I wanted to see was one
towards bringing down waiting lists by ensuring that money moved
with the patient, rather than got lost within the bureaucratic maze of
the NHS. But that left so many questions still unanswered that I
eventually ruled out any substantial new proposals on Health for the
manifesto.
After the meeting I wrote to Cabinet ministers asking them to bring
forward any proposals which required policy approval for
implementation in the next Parliament. Once this had been received,
legislation could then be drafted for introduction in the new
Parliament. To knock all these submissions into a coherent whole I
established a small Manifesto Committee that reported directly to me.
Chaired by John MacGregor, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, its other
members were Brian Griffiths, Stephen Sherbourne, Robin Harris and
John O’Sullivan, a former Associate Editor of The Times, who had
joined my Policy Unit as a special adviser and who drafted the
manifesto.

The manifesto was designed to solve a serious political problem for
us. As a party which had been in government for eight years, we had
to dispel any idea that we were stale and running out of ideas. We
therefore had to advance a number of clear, specific, new and wellworked-out reforms. At the same time we had to protect ourselves
against the jibe: if these ideas are so good, why haven’t you introduced
them before? We did so by presenting our reforms as the third stage of
a rolling Thatcherite programme. In our first term, we revived the
economy and reformed trade union law. In our second, we extended
wealth and capital ownership more widely than ever before. In our
third, we would give ordinary people the kind of choice and quality in
public services that the rich already enjoyed. Looking back, once the
manifesto was published, we heard no more about the Government
running out of steam.
The manifesto was the best ever produced by the Conservative
Party. This was not just because it contained far-reaching proposals to
reform education, housing, local government finance, trade unions and
for more privatization and lower taxes. It was also because the
manifesto projected a vision and then arranged the policies in a clear
and logical away around it. So, for example, the proposals on
education, housing and trade unions (requiring more use of secret
ballots and protecting individual unionists’ rights not to join a strike)
came almost at the very front of the document, highlighting the fact
that we were embarked upon a great programme of ambitious social
reform to give power to the people. Those we wanted to empower
were not just (or even mainly) those who could afford their own
homes or private schools for their children or who had large
investments, but those who lacked these advantages.
The manifesto went to the heart of my convictions. I believe that
Conservative policies must liberate and empower those whom
socialism traps, demoralizes and then contemptuously ignores. This, of
course, is precisely what socialists most fear; it makes a number of
paternalist Tories uneasy too.
I held a meeting at Chequers on Tuesday 21 April with Willie
Whitelaw, Norman Tebbit, David Young, Peter Morrison (Norman’s
Deputy at Central Office) and the draftsmen and advisers to go
through the whole text. Then the redrafting and checking began. Brian
and John reported back to me. Stephen Sherbourne, with his special
kind of tactful ruthlessness, kept all involved to the increasingly tight
deadlines which had to be met. The main new development — and a
substantial improvement — was suggested by David Young. This was
to bring together the record of government achievements, entitled
‘Our First Eight Years’, in a separate document, to go in a wallet
alongside the manifesto. David had great flair and energy, essential for
this kind of work, and I left him in charge of overseeing the
manifesto’s visual presentation and indeed involved him as much as
possible in the wider election preparations.

Because a good deal of misleading comment has been made about
the background to and course of the 1987 general election campaign it
is worth setting some matters straight at the outset. According to some
versions of events this was all about a battle between rival Tory
advertising agencies; according to other accounts the main participants
— particularly myself — behaved in such an unbalanced way that it is
difficult to see why we were all not carried off to one of our new NHS
hospitals by the men in white coats, let alone re-elected. This was not
to be a happy campaign; but it was a successful one and that is what
counts. There were disagreements — but good old-fashioned stand-up
rows, in which most of us regret what we have said and try to forget it
about it without bearing grudges, feature in all election campaigns.
(As far as I can gather there were no rows in what was generally seen
as a smooth running and happy Labour campaign.) As it turned out,
the talents and character of all the main participants in the
Conservative campaign contributed to the victory, though perhaps the
creative tension was more tense than creative on occasion.
Apart from the manifesto and the practical preparations for the
campaign, there was one other task which concerned us in the early
months of 1987. This was the need to deal with the SDP-Liberal
Alliance. The Alliance was by now led by the at first attractive but
later increasingly ridiculous duo of the two Davids, Steel and Owen: it
sought to represent itself as a credible, radical third force and if it did
so might attract what (in the psephological jargon we all found it
impossible to avoid) is called ‘soft’ Tory support. Within the
Conservative Party there was a rumbling debate about how to deal
with the Alliance. Some Conservatives on the left of the Party, who
doubtless had more than a sneaking sympathy with the Alliance
criticisms of my policies, were all for treating them lightly — or just
ignoring them.
Neither Norman Tebbit nor I saw things like this. The fact was that,
for all the posturing, the SDP were retread socialists who had gone
along with nationalization and increased trade union power when in
office, and had only developed second thoughts about socialism when
their ministerial salaries stopped in 1979. The Liberals have always,
for their part, been the least scrupulous force in British politics,
specializing in dubious tactics — fake opinion polls released on the
eve of by-elections to suggest a nonexistent Liberal surge were a wellloved classic. Another tactic, which the SDP quickly borrowed, was to
support one policy when talking to one group and a quite different one
when talking to another. The analysis which Norman had done at
Central Office showed quite clearly that there were splits and
inconsistencies which we must exploit — and do so as far as possible
before the election campaign itself began, when such matters risked
becoming submerged.
So Norman and I agreed that at the Central Council in Torquay on
Saturday 21 March 1987 we would both use the occasion to launch an

assault on the Alliance. I called the Alliance ‘the Labour Party in exile’,
recalled the SDP leaders’ leading role in the last Labour Government
and ended with a quotation from an old music hall song:
I gather at the next election they are hoping to be asked to give us an encore
— the two Davids in that ever-popular musical delight: ‘Don’t tell my mother
I’m half of a horse in a panto.’

While the manifesto was being drafted, I was discussing with
Norman Tebbit what I hoped would be the final shape of the campaign
and my own role in it. At our meeting on Thursday 16 April we went
over press conference themes, advertising and party election
broadcasts. By now I was in a mood for an early — June — election.
We would have served the four years I always felt a government
should. I felt in my bones that the popular mood was with us and that
Labour’s public relations gimmicks were starting to look just a little
tired.
As is the way of these things, the most appropriate date eventually
wrote itself into our programme — Thursday 11 June. By then we
would have seen the results of the local elections which, as in 1983,
would be run through the number-crunchers of Central Office to make
it into a useful guide for a general election. It would be supplemented
by other private polls Norman had commissioned: this was particularly
necessary for Scotland and London where there were no local elections
that year. Some polling in individual key constituencies would also be
done: though such are the problems of sampling in constituency polls
that no one would attach too much weight to these. I saw this analysis
and heard senior colleagues’ views at Chequers on Sunday: I knew by
then that the manifesto was in almost final form. I had been through
the final text with the draftsmen and with Nigel and Norman on that
Saturday.
We had one last disagreement. Nigel wished to include a
commitment to zero inflation in the next Parliament. I thought this
was a hostage to fortune. Events unfortunately proved my caution
right.
As always, I slept on the decision about whether to go to the
country, and then on Monday 11 May I arranged to see the Queen at
12.25 p.m. to seek a dissolution of Parliament for an election on 11
June.
CLOTHES
In my case, preparation for the election involved more than politics. I
also had to be dressed for the occasion. I had already commissioned
from Aquascutum suits, jackets and skirts — ‘working clothes’ for the
campaign.
I took a close interest in clothes, as most women do: but it was also
extremely important that the impression I gave was right for the

political occasion. In Opposition I had worn clothes from various
suppliers. And if I had had any doubts about the importance of getting
these matters very carefully organized, they were dissipated by the
arrival of an outfit ordered for the Opening of Parliament in 1979. It
was a beautiful sapphire blue suit with a matching hat. I had no time
for a fitting and as I put it on with just a few minutes in hand I found
to my horror that it neither fitted nor suited me and had to rush away
to change into something else. It was a lesson not to order from a
sketch, which can disguise unwanted bulges that are too painfully
obvious to the real customer.
From the time of my arrival in Downing Street, Crawfie helped me
choose my wardrobe. Together we would discuss style, colour and
cloth. Everything had to do duty on many occasions so tailored suits
seemed right. (They also have the advantage of gently passing by the
waist.) The most exciting outfits were perhaps those suits I had made
— in black or dark blue — for the Lord Mayor’s Banquet. On foreign
visits, it was, of course, particularly important to be appropriately
dressed. We always paid attention to the colours of the national flag
when deciding on what I should wear. The biggest change, however,
was the new style I adopted when I visited the Soviet Union in the
spring of 1987, for which I wore a black coat with shoulder pads, that
Crawfie had seen in the Aquascutum window, and a marvellous fox fur
hat. (Aquascutum have provided me with most of my suits ever since.)
With the televising of the House of Commons after November 1989
new considerations arose. Stripes and checks looked attractive and
cheerful in the flesh but they could dazzle the television viewer. One
day when I had just not had enough time to change before going to
the House, I continued to wear a black and white check suit.
Afterwards a parliamentary colleague who had seen me on television
told me, ‘what you said was all right, but you looked awful.’ I learned
my lesson. People watching television would also notice whether I had
worn the same suit on successive occasions and even wrote in about it.
So from now on Crawfie always kept a note of what I wore each week
for Prime Minister’s Questions. Out of these notes a diary emerged and
each outfit received its own name, usually denoting the occasion it
was first worn. The pages read something like a travel diary: Paris
Opera, Washington Pink, Reagan Navy, Toronto Turquoise, Tokyo
Blue, Kremlin Silver, Peking Black and last but not least English
Garden. But now my mind was on the forthcoming campaign: it was
time to lay out my navy and white check suit, to be known as ‘Election
‘87’.
THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN
The Conservative Party, as I pointed out earlier, deliberately makes a
slow start in elections. A slow start, however, is one thing: no start at
all is quite another. As the days went by, it seemed to me that the

Opposition parties were making most of the running — though at one
moment they fell over their own feet when Denis Healey told an
astonished world direct from the Soviet capital, where he had been
seeking to establish Labour’s international credentials, that Moscow
was ‘praying for a Labour victory’.
On Friday, I spoke at the Scottish Party Conference in Perth. But of
course at that stage our manifesto had not been published, so my main
message was a warning of what to expect from Labour, which would
try to conceal its true nature and purpose: I told people to expect an
‘iceberg manifesto’ from Labour with ‘one-tenth of its socialism visible,
nine-tenths beneath the surface’.
On Tuesday 19 May, I chaired the first press conference of the
campaign to launch our manifesto: the Alliance’s had already
appeared, and disappeared, and Labour’s, which would be more
notable for omissions than contents, would be launched the same day.
Our manifesto launch was not quite all that I had wished. The press
conference room at Central Office was far too crowded, hot and noisy.
Cabinet ministers — all of whom were present in order to demonstrate
the strength of the ‘team’ — were crowded in too, so much so that the
television shots of the conference looked truly awful. Nick Ridley
explained our housing policy and I hoped that the journalists might be
tempted actually to read the detailed policies of the manifesto. I was
certainly determined that our candidates should do so and I took them
through it in my speech to their conference in Central Hall,
Westminster, the following morning.
But I also used the speech for another purpose. Our political weak
point was the social services, especially Health, so I went out of my
way to tell the candidates, and through them the voters, that the
Government was committed to the principle of a National Health
Service which I said was ‘safe only in our hands’. We had a notably
cautious section on Health in the manifesto. That done, I devoted most
of the campaign to stressing our strong points on the economy and
defence. This did not prevent Health emerging later in the campaign
as an issue; but it meant that we had armed ourselves against Labour’s
attack and done our best to soothe the voters’ anxieties.
D-21 TO D-14
Thursday was my first day out in the campaign Battle Bus. This was a
new high-tech version of the coach I had used in 1983. It was packed
with every kind of up-to-date technology — a computer, different
kinds of radio telephones, a fax, a photocopier and an on-board
technician to look after it all. Painted blue, the Battle Bus bore the
slogan ‘Moving Forward with Maggie’. My first photo-opportunity
beside the bus was at Docklands, chosen as an example of our
Conservative theme of ‘regeneration’. I left Docklands to return to No.
10 at lunchtime. In the meantime, the Battle Bus had to undergo some

regeneration having collided with a BMW. But the bus’s dents were
hammered out overnight and it appeared almost spick and span for the
following day.
I always held my adoption meeting in Finchley on a Thursday rather
than a Friday because the large Jewish population would otherwise be
preparing for the Sabbath. In my speech that Thursday evening I
concentrated heavily on defence, targeting not just the Labour Party
but the Alliance, to the latter’s great irritation.
Our first regular press conference of the campaign was on Friday (22
May). The subject was officially defence and George Younger made the
opening statement. We had suddenly been given a great opportunity to
sink the Alliance parties which some Tory strategists — but not I —
thought were the principal electoral threat to us. Instead, the two
Davids sank themselves. The passage in our manifesto claimed that
their joint defence policy, because it amounted to unilateral nuclear
disarmament by degrees, would just as surely as Labour’s eventually
produce a ‘frightened and fellow-travelling Britain’ vulnerable to
Soviet blackmail. This was not, of course, an allegation of a lack of
patriotism, but a forecast of what weakness would inevitably lead to.
David Owen, however, failed to make this distinction and took
enormous offence. We could hardly believe our luck when for several
days he concentrated the public’s attention on our strongest card,
defence, and his weakest one, his connection with the Liberal Party’s
sandal-wearing unilateralists. The Alliance never recovered from this
misjudgement.
But we were not without our difficulties. I was questioned on
education, on which it was suggested that there were contradictions
between my and Ken Baker’s line on ‘opted-out’, grant-maintained
schools. In fact, we were not suggesting that the new schools would be
fee paying in the sense of being private schools: they would remain in
the public sector. Moreover, the Secretary of State for Education has to
give his approval if a school — whether grant-maintained or not —
wishes to change from being a comprehensive school to becoming a
grammar school.
That said, however — and over the next few days it all had to be
said repeatedly by Ken Baker — I was saddened that we had had to
give all these assurances. It is my passionate belief that what above all
has gone wrong with British education is that since the war we have,
as I put it at this time, ‘strangled the middle way’. Direct grant schools
and grammar schools provided the means for people like me to get on
equal terms with those who came from well-off backgrounds. I would
have liked grant-maintained schools — combined with the other
changes we were making, and perhaps supplemented by a voucher
applying in public and private sectors alike — to move us back to that
‘middle way’. I also wanted a return to selection — not of the old
eleven-plus kind but a development of specialization and competition
so that some schools would become centres of excellence in music,

others in technology, others in science, others in the arts etc. This
would have given specially gifted children the chance to develop their
talents, regardless of their background.
If you are to have specialization of the sort I would like to see you
ought to allow the school, which has become a centre of excellence in
some field, to control its admission procedures. Competition between
schools and individuals will also be more effective if there is some
ability to ‘top up’ grants received from the state. I hope that we can go
further along these lines. We ought to if the full Conservative vision
for education is to be fulfilled. But at this stage it was clearly not going
to be possible.
Some critics argued that this early row resulted from the fact that
our reforms had not been fully thought through. That is certainly true
of some of the details, even though the main lines were clear. But
what was really behind the dispute was that, as I often did in
government, I was using public statements to advance the argument
and to push reluctant colleagues further than they would otherwise
have gone. In an election campaign this was certainly a high-risk
strategy. But without such tactics Thatcherism would be a merely
theoretical viewpoint.
At the end of the first week we had established ourselves as the only
party which had new, fresh ideas. But I felt that we had not gained the
momentum from our manifesto which we might have expected and I
was starting to be concerned about the tactics of the campaign.
My tour that day took me to the North-West. I made a speech to a
large crowd of supporters from the Bury North constituency in the
middle of a field. It was just the sort of lively, old-fashioned
campaigning which I enjoyed.
Sunday was spent with interviews and working on speeches. Unlike
1983, each of my speeches in this campaign was for the particular
occasion rather than drawn from previously prepared material. John
O’Sullivan, Ronnie Millar and Stephen Sherbourne were the ‘home
team’ of speech writers. The general rule was that I would look at the
speech draft overnight, make the changes required and work on the
detail through the following day right up to the delivery of the speech
itself. This made for fresh and interesting speeches which were
probably better than in the 1983 campaign; but it was also much more
difficult to link the theme of the speech with other themes of the day
from the morning press conference, my tour, other ministerial
speeches or external events.
At Monday’s press conference we took the economy as the subject of
the day and Nigel Lawson made the opening statement. This was a
good campaign for Nigel. Not only did he demonstrate complete
command of the issues, he also spotted the implications of Labour’s tax
and national insurance proposals — especially their planned abolition
of the married man’s tax allowance and of the upper limit on

employees’ national insurance contributions — for people on quite
modest incomes. This threw Labour into total disarray in the last week
of the campaign and revealed that they did not understand their own
policies. Nigel had earlier published costings of the Labour Party’s
manifesto at some £35 billion over and above the Government’s
spending plans. As I was to say later in a speech: ‘Nigel’s favourite
bedside reading is Labour policy documents: he likes a good mystery.’
At this stage, however, defence continued to dominate the
headlines, partly because we had deliberately concentrated our early
fire on it, but mainly because of Neil Kinnock’s extraordinary gaffe in
a television interview in which he suggested that Labour’s response to
armed aggression would be to take to the hills for guerilla warfare. We
gleefully leapt upon this and it provided the inspiration for the only
good advertisement of our campaign, depicting ‘Labour’s Policy on
Arms’ with a British soldier, his hands held up in surrender. On
Tuesday evening, after a day’s campaigning in Wales, I told a big rally
in Cardiff:
Labour’s non-nuclear defence policy is in fact a policy for defeat, surrender,
occupation, and finally, prolonged guerilla fighting… I do not understand
how anyone who aspires to government can treat the defence of our country
so lightly.

The speech went very well. Under Harvey Thomas’s supervision our
rallies had by now moved into the twentieth century with a
vengeance. Dry ice shot out over the first six rows, enveloping the
press in a dense fog; lasers flashed madly across the auditorium; our
campaign tune, composed by Andrew Lloyd Webber for the occasion,
blared out; a video of me on international visits was shown; and then
on I walked to deliver my speech, feeling something of an anti-climax.
Wednesday’s press conference was of particular importance to the
campaign because we took education as the theme, with Ken Baker
and me together, in order to allay the doubts our early confusion had
generated and to regain the initiative on the subject, which I regarded
as central to our manifesto. It went well.
But my tours, by general agreement, did not. Neil Kinnock was
gaining more and better television coverage. He was portrayed — as I
had specifically requested at the beginning of the campaign that I
should be — against the background of cheering crowds, or doing
something which fitted in with the theme of the day. The media — far
more I suspect than the general public — were entranced by the
highly polished party election broadcast showing Neil and Glenys
walking hand in hand, bathed in a warm glow of summer sunlight, to
strains of patriotic music, looking rather like an advertisement for
early retirement. This probably encouraged them to give favourable
coverage to the Kinnock tours. And what was I doing on Wednesday? I
was visiting a training centre for guide dogs for the blind. The
symbolism and significance were lost not just on the media but on me
too — and much as I enjoyed looking at the dogs, they did not have a

vote. I felt that I was not meeting enough real people. I was going to
too many factories and firms. This was partly because of the very tight
constraints on security which dictated the tour programme. But the
basic strategy was wrong because the tour was organized around
photo-opportunities — and no one was seeing the photos.
I began to improvise a little on my own account. That afternoon on
our way back from the West Country I had the coach stop at a farm
shop, plentifully stocked with bacon, chutney and cream. The
following press coaches stopped too and we all piled into the shop. I
bought cream and everyone seemed to follow suit. This, I felt, had
been my personal contribution to the rural economy; perhaps we
might even get some reasonable television film footage at last.
D-14 TO D-7
One week into the campaign and in spite of our own difficulties the
political situation was still favourable. Our lead in the polls was
holding up. Indeed, the polls recorded little net change in party
strength during the campaign, though as will be seen there were a few
rogue polls which caused some alarm. There had been a big erosion of
support for the Alliance, whose campaign was marred by splits and
that basic incoherence which is the nemesis of people who eschew
principle in politics. Neil Kinnock kept away from the main Londonbased journalists and Bryan Gould took most of the press conferences.
By the second week, however, this tactic was beginning to rebound
and the Fleet Street press were becoming frustrated and critical: they
were able to cross-question me day after day and they expected to
enjoy a similar sport with the Leader of the Opposition. In this they
were enthusiastically encouraged by Norman Tebbit, who by
temperament and talent was perfectly suited to maul Neil Kinnock and
did so effectively in successive speeches as the campaign wore on.
Thursday’s press conference was on the NHS. Norman Fowler had
devised a splendid illustration of new hospitals built throughout
Britain, marked by lights on a map which were lit up when he pressed
a switch. Like the Kinnocks’ election broadcast, I had him repeat the
performance by popular demand. Sadly, like so much of the campaign,
it did not come over properly on television. The press conference went
smoothly. But what was worrying me, as usual, was my speech that
evening in Solihull.
We had worked on the draft late until 3.30 a.m. but I was still not
happy with it. I continued to break away to work on it whenever I
could during the day — that is when I was not meeting candidates,
talking to regional editors, admiring Jaguars at the factory and then
meeting crowds at the Home and Garden exhibition at the
Birmingham NEC. As soon as we arrived at Dame Joan Seccombe’s
house — she is one of the Party’s most committed volunteers — I left
the others to enjoy her hospitality and closeted myself away with with

my speech writers, working frantically on the text right up to the last
moment. For some mysterious reason the more you all suffer in
preparing a speech, the better it turns out to be and this speech was
very good indeed. It contained one wounding passage which drew a
roar of approval from the audience:
Never before has the Labour Party offered the country a defence policy of
such recklessness. It has talked of occupation — a defence policy of the
white flag. During my time in government white flags have only once
entered into our vocabulary. That was the night, when at the end of the
Falklands War, I went to the House of Commons to report: ‘The white flags
are flying over Port Stanley.’

But I was to broaden the attack on Labour in this speech. I levelled
my sights at the ‘loony Left’s’ policy of municipal socialism and sexual
propaganda on the rates. This drew applause which surprised even me.
It became clear that there was real public anxiety about the extremism
cloaked by Labour’s moderate image. I set out with renewed energy in
every speech to win over traditional Labour supporters. Indeed, this
became one of my principal themes.
Nick Ridley explained our housing policy at the Friday morning
press conference. Then I set off on my tour. This was one of our more
successful days, including good photo-opportunities, the chance to
meet real people and even a spot of heckling from a Labour councillor
when I was making a speech through a loudspeaker to a large crowd
on a sports field. The television cameras covered what was thought to
be my receiving from No. 10 the news that a British diplomat
kidnapped in Tehran had been released: in fact I knew this anyway
and the person I was speaking to over the telephone was a secretary at
Conservative Central Office. The best picture of the campaign was in
Tiptree, in John Wakeham’s constituency. Followed by three tractors
pulling trailers full of perspiring press-men and photographers, I was
driven out into a blackcurrant field to be photographed looking
through binoculars at a bird sanctuary. It was a surreal picture of
splendid isolation.
With ten days to go, David Young gave the press conference on
Monday 1 June, arguing that voting Conservative was the only way to
keep unemployment coming down. Using striking graphics, he
summarized the elements of what we called ‘Labour’s job destruction
package’, showing how thousands of jobs would go as a result of their
policies for defence cuts, sanctions on South Africa and extra powers
for trade unions. It was a good performance and I was glad that we
were at last beginning to get across our strong card of economic
prosperity.
The next day, after chairing our press conference, which again was
on the economy, I flew to Scotland. By now the Labour Party had
decided that they had better keep off policy altogether and they leaked
that instead they would concentrate on personal attacks on me. Neil
Kinnock did not do this with great subtlety: he described me as ‘a

would-be empress’ and the Cabinet as ‘sycophants and doormats’. I
was determined to make this tactic rebound on them. I spoke at a rally
that night in Edinburgh:
This week [Labour] are resorting to personal abuse. This is an excellent sign.
Personal abuse is no substitute for policy. It signals panic. In any case, let me
assure you it will not affect me in the slightest. As that great American Harry
Truman observed: ‘if you can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen.’ Well,
Mr Chairman, after eight years over the hot stove I think I can say, with all
due modesty, that the heat is entirely tolerable.

In spite of the bad weather it had been a pleasant, old-fashioned day
of campaigning. Denis enjoyed it too. We visited the Scottish &
Newcastle Brewery in Edinburgh and Denis with somewhat feigned
reluctance downed the obligatory pint on my behalf. Next morning
after giving press and television interviews I flew to Newcastle and
went on to the Gateshead Metro shopping centre where, amid the
large crowds which gathered as I went into different shops, I felt that I
was at last making proper contact with the electorate.
My satisfaction, however, was marred by the onset of extremely
painful toothache. I had been to the dentist before the campaign began
and nothing seemed amiss. But the pain grew worse as the afternoon
wore on and later that evening after I returned to London I went to the
dentist once more. There was apparently an abscess under my tooth
which would need proper treatment later. For the moment I had to
rely on pain killers. By the time I got back to London I had something
else unpleasant to think about. I was told in the course of the
afternoon that the next day’s Gallup poll would show a definite shift
from us to Labour for the first time, cutting our lead to 4 per cent.
D-7 TO D-DAY
I could not get to sleep that night because of my tooth. At about 4.00
a.m. Crawfie gave me some pain killers. They did the trick for the
toothache and allowed me to get some rest. But they made me feel and
— as I have later learned — look catatonic when, first thing the
following morning, I went across to Central Office. This has gone
down in political mythology as ‘wobbly Thursday’ or ‘black Thursday’:
since we did not wobble but the news looked black I prefer the second
description.
The subject of the day was pensions and social security. I had
expressly told Central Office that I wanted Health to be covered as
well but this had not been done, which angered me. At the press
conference briefing my toothache had come on again and I tore into
Norman Fowler’s draft press release, rather unfairly, until David
Wolfson, who is one of the few people who gets away with this sort
ofthing, told me to ‘shut up’ and read it through first before making
any more changes. I did so, agreed it and then faced the news about
the poll. The worst was that there would be another poll by Marplan

for the next day which was the subject of wild speculation. It would
show whether the Gallup result was just a rogue poll, or whether our
position really was slipping away.
I had talked to David Young the previous night about my worries
about the campaign, which seemed to me to be unfocused and not to
stress sufficiently our strongest themes, in particular the record of
economic prosperity. The following day, Norman Tebbit and I had a
ding-dong row. This cleared the air. We agreed that some of our
younger ministers, like John Moore and Kenneth Clarke, should be
given a higher billing. I arranged to appear upon the David Frost
programme from which I had been withdrawn. But at this stage we
had still not agreed on the advertising for the following week.

The press conference that day was widely considered to be a disaster
for us and I was held to blame. The issue arose of private health care. I
refused to be apologetic for the fact that I used private health
insurance to have minor operations done speedily, without adding to
the queue for NHS treatment and using my own money. What I said
was immediately exploited as being insensitive, callous and uncaring. I
was aware that the press conference had not been a success in public
relations terms. But I was not going to back down, however much
others around me hoped that I would stay silent on the matter in the
interviews when it was bound to be raised. Moreover, my instincts
were right and that of the professionals wrong. The press set out on
what turned out to be a fruitful hunt for examples of Labour
politicians and their families who used private health care. By the end
of the campaign I had won this argument — and it was definitely
worth winning.
After the press conference I set out my ideas for a major advertising
campaign, which I had previously privately discussed with Tim Bell,
who had of course been effectively excluded from the campaign by
Central Office and Saatchis. I wanted this to be based heavily on our
record of achievements, which may have seemed dull to the creative
and unpolitical minds of communications specialists but which — as
was subsequently demonstrated again at the 1992 general election —
are what the electorate is really likely to vote on. Saatchis were to
devise one set of advertising for me to see and approve: meanwhile
Tim Bell and David Young were working on another which I believed
would be better. I went to the Alton Towers theme park in
Staffordshire, without being quite in the mood for jollity, still worried
about what would come of the advertising, even more concerned
about the mysterious opinion poll we were waiting for. There was
media speculation that it would show our lead down to 1 per cent.
While at Alton Towers I overheard a BBC newscaster remark, ‘that’s it:
she’s downhill all the way now.’
I had little time to deal with the advertising when I arrived back at
No. 10. I liked the material Tim Bell had prepared. Norman Tebbit,
who is always a big man in such situations, frankly acknowledged that

the new ideas for the advertising were better. I left him and David
Young to deal with it all while I went on with the briefing for my
interview with Jonathan Dimbleby. There is only one complaint I still
allow myself to nurture against my staff in No. 10: that is that I was
not told before I went on television about the results of the poll, which
put us back in a healthy lead and showed that the earlier one was not
to be taken seriously. Perhaps it was as well, for it was a tough
interview and I really fought back. At least one good — if extremely
expensive — thing came out of that rogue poll: for it prompted me to
insist on that newspaper advertising blitz on the lines I wanted, which
consolidated our support.
I was due to speak in Chester on Friday. I did not really concentrate
on my draft speech until I was in the train that morning to Gatwick. I
found it far too theatrical. I was expected to use ‘props’ — to ensure
that television news concentrated on certain passages — a large key to
illustrate the advances in home ownership was just one of several.
Stephen Sherbourne and John Whittingdale were promptly asked to
bring this flight of fancy down to earth. As is often the case with
speeches, panic proved productive. The revised text was first class: the
audience approved as well.
Over the weekend I had several more big interviews. The Today
Programme on Saturday morning was characteristically hostile.
However, I enjoyed Channel 4’s Face the People later that morning, in
which voters from marginal constituencies questioned me on our
policies. I loved these occasions: the questions are real and have a life
and a depth that one-to-one interviews never evoke. On Sunday I was
interviewed by David Frost. The questioning was tough but fair,
concentrating heavily once more on the private health issue. We all
felt that it had gone quite well.
This was also the day of our final ‘family rally’ at Wembley where,
as in 1983, television personalities, actors, comedians and musicians
gave us their public support. Ronnie Millar had written a version of
the Dad’s Army theme song, ‘Who do you think you are kidding, Mr
Kinnock?’, to which the audience sang along as at a pantomime. This
went down very well and when my turn came to speak I picked up the
theme predicting that millions of traditional Labour voters, disgusted
with their Party’s swing to the left and neutralism, would soon be
joining ‘Mum’s Army’. To my surprise it was the lead item on that
evening’s TV news. I felt that this important message, at least, was
getting across.
On Monday, after chairing our press conference and then recording
an interview with Sir Robin Day, I left for the G7 economic summit in
Venice. I had decided before the campaign began that I would almost
certainly go to the G7, just as I had gone to Williamsburg in 1983. My
role as ‘international statesman’ was a more important element in our
election campaign this time; so there were even stronger political
arguments for making the visit. In any case, I never missed the

opportunity of talking with President Reagan as I would both at the
dinner that evening which concentrated on arms control and at my
tête-à-tête meeting with him the following morning before the first
formal session on the economy. There was a real point at issue on
arms control, on which I wanted to make my position clear.
Chancellor Kohl wanted to press ahead with negotiation with the
Soviets for the removal of shorter-range nuclear weapons. I was not
prepared to see British forces in Germany left without their protection
and said so forcefully over dinner. I would not subscribe to any
communiqué which established the goal of further reductions, at least
until agreement to eliminate chemical weapons and redress the
imbalance in conventional forces. In this, I received the crucial
backing of President Reagan.
I was back in Britain by 2.30 on Tuesday afternoon. A draft of my
speech for Harrogate that evening was waiting for me with Stephen
Sherbourne and the speech writers when I landed at Gatwick. To my
relief and their amazement I liked it. It was essentially a summary of
what I, at least, thought were the three main themes of the election:
Conservative prosperity, Labour extremism, especially on defence, and
the new reforms of education and housing to give more power to the
people. On the way to the hall at Harrogate I had been given the
results of the specially large — and therefore significant — Gallup
2000 poll. They showed us with a 7-point lead. ‘Not enough,’ I said.
But it was good news all the same. It seemed that our opinion poll
rating had been practically level throughout the entire campaign.
I returned to London, but I did not ease up. On Wednesday morning
I answered questions on the Election Call ‘phone-in programme. I spent
most of the afternoon campaigning in Portsmouth and Southampton.
After voting myself, I spent Thursday morning and early afternoon
in Finchley visiting our Committee Rooms and then, as the time for
getting late voters out to the poll approached, I returned to No. 10.
Norman Tebbit came over and we had a long talk over drinks in my
study, not just about the campaign and the likely result, but also about
Norman’s own plans. He had already told me that he intended to leave
the Government after the election because he felt that he should spend
more time with Margaret. There was not much I could say to try to
persuade him otherwise, because his reasons were as personal as they
were admirable. But I did bitterly regret his decision. I had too few
like-minded supporters in the Government, and of these none had
Norman’s strength and acumen.
I had supper in the flat and listened to the television comment and
speculation about the result. Before I left for Finchley at 10.30 p.m. I
heard Vincent Hanna on the BBC forecasting a hung Parliament. ITV
was talking about a Conservative majority of about 40. I felt
reasonably confident that with the Alliance vote having clearly
collapsed we would have a majority, but I was not at all confident how
large it would be. My own result would be one of the later ones; but

the first results began to come in just after 11 p.m. We held Torbay
with a larger than predicted majority. Then we held Hyndburn, the
second most marginal seat, then Cheltenham, a seat targeted by the
Liberals, and then Basildon. At about 2.15 a.m. we had passed the
winning post. My own majority was down by 400, though I secured a
slightly higher percentage of the vote (53.9 per cent).
I was driven back into town, arriving at 2.45 a.m. at Conservative
Central Office to celebrate the victory and thank those who had helped
achieve it. Then I returned to Downing Street where I was met by my
personal staff. I felt grateful to them because, whatever the
deficiencies of the national campaign, they had done a superb job. I
remember Denis saying to Stephen Sherbourne, as we went down the
line: ‘You have done as much as anyone else to win the election. We
could not have done it without you.’ Stephen may have been less
pleased by my next remark. It was to ask him to come up to the study
to begin work on making the next Cabinet. A new day had begun.
*
*

See Chapter 22.
Seep. 591.

CHAPTER XX

An Improving Disposition
Reforms in education, housing and the Health Service; the situation in
Scotland

THE NEW GOVERNMENT
The first priority after the 1987 election victory was to see that I had
the right team of ministers to implement the reforms set out in our
manifesto. The reshuffle was a limited one: five Cabinet ministers left
the Government, two at their own request. The general balance of the
new Cabinet made it clear that ‘consolidation’ was no more my
preferred option after the election than before it. John Biffen, whose
less than inspiring slogan this had been, left the Cabinet: this was a
loss in some ways, for he agreed with me about Europe and had sound
instincts on economic matters too, but he had come to prefer
commentary to collective responsibility. I lost Norman Tebbit for
reasons I have explained. But Cecil Parkinson, a radical of my way of
thinking, rejoined the Cabinet as Energy Secretary. I made no change
at Education where Ken Baker would make up in presentational flair
whatever he lacked in attention to detail, nor Environment where Nick
Ridley was obviously the right man to implement the housing reforms
which he had conceived. These two areas — schools and housing —
were those in which we were proposing the most far-reaching changes.
But it was not long before I decided that there must be a major reform
of the National Health Service too. In John Moore, whom I had
promoted to be Secretary of State for Health and Social Services, I had
another radical, anxious to reform the ossified system he had
inherited. So the Government soon found itself embarked on even
more far-reaching social reforms than we had originally intended.
APPROACHES TO EDUCATION REFORM
The starting point for the education reforms outlined in our general
election manifesto was a deep dissatisfaction (which I fully shared)
with Britain’s standard of education. There had been improvements in
the pupil-teacher ratio and real increases in education spending per
child. But increases in public spending had not by and large led to
higher standards. The classic case was the left-wing dominated Inner
London Education Authority (ILEA) which spent more per pupil than
any other education authority and achieved some of the worst
examination results. Precisely what conditions and qualities made for
good schools was a matter of vigorous debate. I had always been an

advocate of relatively small schools as against the giant, characterless
comprehensives. I also believed that too many teachers were less
competent and more ideological than their predecessors. I distrusted
the new ‘child-centred’ teaching techniques, the emphasis on
imaginative engagement rather than learning facts, and the modern
tendency to blur the lines of discrete subjects and incorporate them in
wider, less definable entities like ‘humanities’. And I knew from
parents, employers and pupils themselves that too many people left
school without a basic knowledge of reading, writing and arithmetic.
But it would be no easy matter to change for the better what happened
in schools.
One option would in theory have been to advance much further
along the path of centralization. In fact, I did come to the conclusion
that there had to be some consistency in the curriculum, at least in the
core subjects. The state could not just ignore what children learned:
they were, after all, its future citizens and we had a duty to them.
Moreover, it was disruptive if children who moved from a school in
one area to a school elsewhere found themselves confronted with a
course of work different in almost all respects from that to which they
had become accustomed. Alongside the national curriculum should be
a nationally recognized and reliably monitored system of testing at
various stages of the child’s school career, which would allow parents,
teachers, local authorities and central government to know what was
going right and wrong and take remedial action if necessary. The fact
that since 1944 the only compulsory subject in the curriculum in
Britain had been religious education reflected a healthy distrust of the
state using central control of the syllabus as a means of propaganda.
But that was hardly the risk now: the propaganda was coming from
left-wing local authorities, teachers and pressure groups, not us. What
I never believed, though, was that the state should try to regiment
every detail of what happened in schools. Some people argued that the
French centralized system worked: but, whether it worked for France
or not, such arrangements would not be acceptable in Britain. Here
even the strictly limited objectives I set for the national curriculum
were immediately seen by the vested interests in education as an
opportunity to impose their own agenda.
The other possibility was to go much further in the direction of
decentralization by giving power and choice to parents. Keith Joseph
and I had always been attracted by the education voucher, which
would give parents a fixed — perhaps means-tested — sum, so that
they could shop around in the public and private sectors of education
for the school which was best for their children. The arguments
against this were more political than practical. By means testing a
voucher one could even reduce the ‘dead weight’ cost — that is the
amount lost to the Exchequer in the form of subsidy for parents who
would otherwise have sent their children to private schools anyway.

However, Keith Joseph recommended and I accepted that we could
not bring in a straightforward education voucher scheme. In the event,
we were, through our education reforms, able to realize the objectives
of parental choice and educational variety in other ways. Through the
assisted places scheme* and the rights of parental choice of school
under our 1980 Parents’ Charter we were moving some way towards
this objective without mentioning the word ‘voucher’.
In the 1988 Education Reform Act we now made further strides in
that direction. We introduced open enrolment — that is allowing
popular schools to expand to their physical capacity (broadly judged
by the numbers of children accommodated in 1979). This significantly
widened choice further and prevented local authorities setting
arbitrary limits on good schools just to keep unsuccessful schools full.
An essential element in the same reforms was per capita funding,
which meant that state money followed the child to whatever school
he attended. Parents would vote with their children’s feet and schools
actually gained resources when they gained pupils. The worse schools
in these circumstances would either have to improve or close. In effect
we had gone as far as we could towards a ‘public sector voucher’. I
would have liked to go further still and decided that we must work up
a possible full-scale voucher scheme — I hinted at this in my final
Party Conference speech — but did not have the time to take the idea
further.
GRANT-MAINTAINED SCHOOLS
But we needed to do one more thing to make parental choice a reality.
This was to give more powers and responsibility to individual schools
— something very much in line with my instinctive preference for
smaller schools rooted in real local communities and, insofar as this
was possible in the state sector, reliant on their own efforts and
energies. But it was Brian Griffiths who devised the extremely
successful model of the ‘grant-maintained (GM) schools’, which are
free from local education authority (LEA) control entirely and are
directly funded from the DES.* With a healthy range of GM schools,
City Technology Colleges, denominational schools and private schools
(known as ‘public’ schools, much to the confusion of American visitors
to Britain) parents would have a much wider choice. But, even more
vital, the very fact of having all the important decisions taken at the
level closest to parents and teachers, not by a distant and insensitive
bureaucracy, would make for better education. This would be true of
all schools, which was why we had introduced the Local Management
of Schools Initiative (LMS) to give schools more control of their own
budgets. But GM schools took it a giant step further.
The governors of a GM school were empowered to manage its
budget (receiving their money directly without a service charge
deducted by the LEA). They appointed the staff including the head

teacher, agreed policy as regards admissions with the Secretary of
State, decided the curriculum (subject to the core requirements) and
owned the school and its assets. The schools most likely to opt out of
LEA control and become GM schools were those which had a
distinctive identity, which wished to specialize in some particular
subject or which wanted to escape from the clutches of some left-wing
local authority keen to impose its own ideological priorities.
The vested interests working against the success of GM schools were
strong. The DES, reluctant to endorse a reform that did not extend
central control, would have liked to impose all manner of checks and
controls on their operation. Local authority officials sometimes
campaigned fiercely to prevent opting out by particular schools. And,
unexpectedly, the churches also mounted an opposition. In the face of
so much hostility I had the Grant-Maintained Schools Trust set up to
publicize the GM scheme and advise those interested in making use of
it. In fact, GM schools proved increasingly popular, not least with head
teachers who were now, in consultation with the governors, able to set
their own priorities.
THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM
The decentralizing features of our policy — open enrolment, per capita
funding, City Technology Colleges, Local Management of Schools and
above all grant-maintained schools — were extraordinarily successful.
By contrast, the national curriculum — the most important
centralizing measure — soon ran into difficulties. I never envisaged
that we would end up with the bureaucracy and the thicket of
prescriptive measures which eventually emerged. I wanted the DES to
concentrate on establishing a basic syllabus for English, Mathematics
and Science with simple tests to show what pupils knew. It always
seemed to me that a small committee of good teachers ought to be
able to pool their experience and write down a list of the topics and
sources to be covered without too much difficulty. There ought then to
be plenty of scope left for the individual teacher to concentrate with
children on the particular aspects of the subject in which he or she felt
a special enthusiasm or interest. I had no wish to put good teachers in
a strait jacket. As for testing, I always recognized that no snapshot of a
child’s, a class’s or a school’s performance on a particular day was
going to tell the whole truth. But tests did provide an independent
outside check on what was happening. Nor did it seem to me that the
fact that some children would know more than others was something
to be shied away from. Of course, not every child had the same
potential and certainly not in every subject. But the purpose of testing
was not to measure merit but knowledge and the capacity to apply it.
Unfortunately, my philosophy turned out to be different from that of
those to whom Ken Baker entrusted the drawing-up of the national
curriculum and the formulation of the tests alongside it.

There was a basic dilemma. As Ken emphasized in our meetings, it
was necessary to take as many as possible of the teachers and Her
Majesty’s Inspectorate (HMI) with us in the reforms we were making.
After all, it was teachers not politicians who would be implementing
them. On the other hand, the educational establishment’s terms for
accepting the national curriculum and testing could well prove
unacceptable. For them, the new national curriculum would be
expected to give legitimacy and universal application to the changes
which had been made over the last twenty years or so in the content
and methods of teaching. Similarly, testing should in their eyes be
‘diagnostic’ rather than ‘summative’ — and this was only the tip of the
jargon iceberg — and should be heavily weighted towards assessment
by teachers themselves, rather than by objective outsiders. So by midJuly the papers I was receiving from the DES were proposing a
national curriculum of ten subjects which would account for 80–90 per
cent of school time. They wanted different ‘attainment targets’,
stressing that assessments should not denote ‘passing’ or ‘failing’:
much of this assessment would be internal to the school. Two new
bodies — the National Curriculum Council and the Schools
Examination and Assessment Council — were to be set up. In fact, the
original simplicity of the scheme had been lost and the influence of
HMI and the teachers’ unions was manifest.
All this was bad enough. But then in September I received a further
proposal from Ken Baker for comprehensive monitoring of the national
curriculum by the recruitment of 800 extra LEA Inspectors, who
themselves would be monitored and controlled by the HMI, which
would doubtless have to be expanded as well. I noted: ‘it is utterly
ridiculous. The results will come through in the tests and exams.’ I
stressed to the DES that all of these proposals would alienate teachers,
hold back individual initiative at school level and centralize education
to an unacceptable degree. The Cabinet sub-committee which I chaired
to oversee the education reforms decided that all of the core and
foundation subjects taken together should absorb no more than 70 per
cent of the curriculum. But, at Ken Baker’s insistence, I agreed that
this figure should not be publicly released — presumably it would
have caused offence with the education bureaucrats who were by now
ambitiously planning how each hour of school time should properly be
spent.
The next problem arose from the report by the ‘Task Group on
Assessment and Testing’ which we had established in July 1987 to
advise on the practical considerations which would govern assessment,
including testing, within the national curriculum. Ken Baker warmly
welcomed the report. Whether he had read it properly I do not know:
if he had it says much for his stamina. Certainly I had no opportunity
to do so before agreeing to its publication, having simply been
presented with this weighty, jargon-filled document in my overnight
box with a deadline for publication the following day. The fact that it

was then welcomed by the Labour Party, the National Union of
Teachers and the Times Educational Supplement was enough to confirm
for me that its approach was suspect. It proposed an elaborate and
complex system of assessment — teacher-dominated and uncosted. It
adopted the ‘diagnostic’ view of tests, placed the emphasis on teachers
doing their own assessment and was written in an inpenetrable
educationalist jargon. I minuted out my concerns to Ken Baker but by
now, of course, it had been published and was already the subject of
consultation.
In July 1988 I received the Mathematics National Curriculum
papers. It was a small mountain. A complicated array of ‘levels’,
‘attainment targets’ and ‘profile components’ based on ‘tasks’ which
pupils were expected to perform was surely not what teachers
required. In commenting, I stressed the need for greater clarity,
simplicity and a more practical approach.
Then in October I read the first report of the National Curriculum
English Working Group. This too I found disappointing, as I had the
earlier Kingman Committee Report on the teaching of English
language — and for the same reasons. Although there was acceptance
of a place for Standard English, the traditional learning of grammar
and learning by heart, which I considered vital for memory training,
seemed to find no favour. Unsatisfactory as all this seemed to me, the
fact that many critics considered the direction of these
recommendations to be controversial demonstrated just how far things
had deteriorated in many classrooms. Moreover, the final report of the
English Working Group responded to the criticism made of its first
report and gave at least some more emphasis to grammar and spelling.
Perhaps the hardest battle I fought on the national curriculum was
about history. Though not an historian myself, I had a very clear —
and I had naively imagined uncontroversial — idea of what history
was. History is an account of what happened in the past. Learning
history, therefore, requires knowledge of events. It is impossible to
make sense of such events without absorbing sufficient factual
information and without being able to place matters in a clear
chronological framework — which means knowing dates. No amount
of imaginative sympathy for historical characters or situations can be a
substitute for the initially tedious but ultimately rewarding business of
memorizing what actually happened. I was, therefore, very concerned
when in December 1988 I received Ken Baker’s written proposals for
the teaching of history and the composition of the History Working
Group on the curriculum. The guidance offered was not rigorous
enough. There was also too much emphasis given to ‘cross-curricular’
learning: I felt that history must be taught as a separate subject. Nor
was I happy at the list of people Ken Baker was suggesting. His initial
names contained no major historian of repute but included the author
of the definitive work on the ‘New History’ which, with its emphasis
on concepts rather than chronology and empathy rather than facts,

was at the root of so much that was going wrong. Ken saw my point
and made some changes. But this was only the beginning of the
argument.
In July 1989 the History Working Group produced its interim
report. I was appalled. It put the emphasis on interpretation and
enquiry as against content and knowledge. There was insufficient
weight given to British history. There was not enough emphasis on
history as chronological study. Ken Baker wanted to give the report a
general welcome while urging its chairman to make the attainment
targets specify more clearly factual knowledge and increasing the
British history content. But this did not in my view go far enough. I
considered the document comprehensively flawed and told Ken that
there must be major, not just minor, changes. In particular, I wanted
to see a clearly set out chronological framework for the whole history
curriculum. But the test would of course be the final report.
By the time this arrived in March 1990 John MacGregor had gone to
Education. I thought that he would prove more effective than Ken
Baker in keeping a grip on how our education reform proposals were
implemented, though I knew that he did not have Ken’s special talent
for putting our case in public. On this occasion, however, John
MacGregor was far more inclined to welcome the report than I had
expected. It did now put greater emphasis on British history. But the
attainment targets it set out did not specifically include knowledge of
historical facts, which seemed to me extraordinary. However, the
coverage of some subjects — for example twentieth-century British
history — was too skewed to social, religious, cultural and aesthetic
matters rather than political events. The detail of the history
curriculum would impose too inflexible a framework on teachers. I
raised these points at a meeting with John on the afternoon of Monday
19 March. He defended the report’s proposals. But I insisted that it
would not be right to impose the sort of approach which it contained.
It should go out to consultation but no guidance should at present be
issued.
By now I had become thoroughly exasperated with the way in which
the national curriculum proposals were being diverted from their
original purpose. I made my reservations known in an interview I gave
to the Sunday Telegraph in early April. In this I defended the principles
of the national curriculum but criticized the detailed prescription in
other than core subjects which had now become its least agreeable
feature. My comments were greeted with consternation by the DES.
There was no need for the national curriculum proposals and the
testing which accompanied them to have developed as they did. Ken
Baker paid too much attention to the DES, the HMI and progressive
educational theorists in his appointments and early decisions; and
once the bureaucratic momentum had begun it was difficult to stop.
John MacGregor, under constant pressure from me, did what he could.
He made changes to the history curriculum which reinforced the

position of British history and reduced some of the unnecessary
interference. He insisted that the sciences could be taught separately,
not just as one integrated subject. He stipulated that at least 30 per
cent of GCSE English should be tested by written examination. Yet the
whole system was very different from that which I originally
envisaged. By the time I left office I was convinced that there would
have to be a new drive to simplify the national curriculum and testing.
THE NEXT WAVE OF EDUCATION REFORM
Education policy was one of the areas in which my Policy Unit and I
had begun radical thinking about proposals for the next election
manifesto — some of which we envisaged announcing in advance,
perhaps at the March 1991 Central Council meeting. Brian Griffiths
and I were concentrating on three questions at the time I left office.
First, there was the need to go much further with ‘opting out’ of LEA
control. I authorized John MacGregor to announce to the October
1990 Party Conference the extension of the GM schools scheme to
cover smaller primary schools as well. But I had much more radical
options in mind. Brian Griffiths had written me a paper which
envisaged the transfer of many more schools to GM status and the
transfer of other schools — which were not yet ready to assume the
full responsibility — to the management of special trusts, set up for
the purpose. Essentially, this would have meant the unbundling of
many of the LEAs’ powers, leaving them with a monitoring and
advisory role — perhaps in the long term not even that. It would have
been a way to ease the state still further out of education, thus
reversing the worst aspects of post-war education policy.
Second, there was the need radically to improve teacher training.
Unusually, I had sent a personal minute to Ken Baker in November
1988 expressing my concerns. I said we must go much further in this
area and asked him to bring forward proposals. The background to this
was that Keith Joseph had set up the Council for the Accreditation of
Teacher Education (CATE) in 1984 to approve teacher-training
courses. But the position had barely improved. There was still too little
emphasis on factual knowledge of the subjects teachers needed to
teach, too little practical classroom experience acquired and too much
stress on the sociological and psychological aspects. For example, I
could barely believe the contents of one of the B.Ed, courses — duly
approved by CATE — at Brighton Polytechnic about which one
concerned Tory supporter sent in details. Entitled ‘Contexts for
learning’, this course claimed to be enabling teachers to come to terms
with such challenging questions as ‘To what extent do schools
reinforce gender stereotypes?’ It continued: ‘students are then
introduced to the debate between protagonists [sic] of education and
those who advocate anti-racist education.’ I felt that the ‘protagonists’
of education had a better case.

The effective monopoly exercised by the existing teacher-training
routes had to be broken. Ken Baker devised two schemes — that of
‘licensed teachers’ to attract those who wished to enter teaching as a
second career and that of ‘articled teachers’ which was essentially an
apprenticeship scheme of ‘on the job’ training for younger graduates.
These were good proposals. But there was no evidence that there
would be a large enough inflow of teachers from these sources
significantly to change the ethos and raise the standards of the
profession. So I had Brian Griffiths begin work on how to increase the
numbers: we wanted to see at least half of the new teachers come
through these or similar schemes, as opposed to teacher-training
institutions.
The third educational policy issue on which work was being done
was the universities. By exerting financial pressure we had increased
administrative efficiency and provoked overdue rationalization.
Universities were developing closer links with business and becoming
more entrepreneurial. Student loans (which topped up grants) had also
been introduced: these would make students more discriminating
about the courses they chose. A shift of support from university grants
to the payment of tuition fees would lead in the same direction of
greater sensitivity to the market. Limits placed on the security of
tenure enjoyed by university staff also encouraged dons to pay closer
attention to satisfying the teaching requirements made of them. All
this encountered strong political opposition from within the
universities. Some of it was predictable. But undoubtedly other critics
were genuinely concerned about the future autonomy and academic
integrity of universities.
I had to concede that these critics had a stronger case than I would
have liked. It made me concerned that many distinguished academics
thought that Thatcherism in education meant a philistine
subordination of scholarship to the immediate requirements of
vocational training. That was certainly no part of my kind of
Thatcherism.* That was why before I left office Brian Griffiths, with
my encouragement, had started working on a scheme to give the
leading universities much more independence. The idea was to allow
them to opt out of Treasury financial rules and raise and keep capital,
owning their assets as a trust. It would have represented a radical
decentralization of the whole system.
IMPLEMENTING THE HOUSING REFORMS
Of the three major social services — Education, the Health Service and
Housing — it was, in my view, over the last of these that the most
significant question mark hung. By the mid-1980s everything in
housing pointed to the need to roll back the existing activities of
government. Although the country’s housing stock needed
refurbishment and adaptation, there was no pressing need now — as

arguably there had been after the war — for massive new house
building by the state. Furthermore, rising incomes and capital
ownership were placing more and more people in the position to buy
their homes with a mortgage.
State intervention to control rents and give tenants security of
tenure in the private rented sector had been disastrous in reducing the
supply of rented properties. The state in the form of local authorities
had frequently proved an insensitive, incompetent and corrupt
landlord. And insofar as there were shortages in specific categories of
housing, these were in the private rented sector where rent control
and security of tenure had reduced the supply. Moreover, new forms
of housing had emerged. Housing Associations and the Housing
Corporation which financed them — though they could be all too
wasteful and bureaucratic on occasion — offered alternative ways of
providing ‘social housing’ without the state as landlord. Similarly,
tenant involvement in the form of co-operatives and the different
kinds of trusts being pioneered in the United States offered new ways
of pulling government out of housing management. I believed that the
state must continue to provide mortgage tax relief in order to
encourage home ownership, which was socially desirable. (Far better
and cheaper to help people to help themselves than to provide housing
for them.) The state also had to provide assistance for poorer people
with housing costs through housing benefit. But as regards the
traditional post-war role of government in housing — that is building,
ownership, management, and regulation — the state should be
withdrawn from these areas just as far and as fast as possible.
This was the philosophical starting point for the housing reforms on
which Nick Ridley was working from the autumn of 1986, which he
submitted for collective discussion at the end of January 1987, and
which after several meetings under my chairmanship were included in
the 1987 general election manifesto.* The beauty of the package which
Nick devised was that it combined a judicious mixture of central
government intervention, local authority financial discipline,
deregulation and wider choice for tenants. In so doing it achieved a
major shift away from the ossified system which had grown up under
socialism.
Central government would play a role through Housing Action
Trusts (HATs) in redeveloping badly run down council estates and
passing them on to other forms of ownership and management —
including home ownership, ownership by housing associations and
transfer to a private landlord — with no loss of tenant rights. Second,
the new ‘ring-fenced’ framework for local authority housing accounts
would force councils to raise rents to levels which provided money for
repairs. It would also increase the pressure on councils for the disposal
of part or all of their housing stock to housing associations, other
landlords or indeed home ownership. Third, deregulation of new lets
— through development of shorthold and assured tenancies — should

at least arrest the decline of the private rented sector: Nick rightly
insisted that there should be stronger legal provisions enacted against
harassment to balance this deregulation. Finally, opening up the
possibility of council tenants changing their landlords, or groups of
tenants running their estates through co-operatives under our ‘tenants’
choice’ proposals, could reduce the role of local authority landlords
still further.
The most difficult aspect of the package seemed likely to be the
higher council rents, which would also mean much higher state
spending on housing benefit. More people on housing benefit means
more welfare dependency; on the other hand, it seemed better to
provide help with housing costs through benefit than through
subsidizing the rents of local authority tenants indiscriminately.
Moreover, the higher rents paid by those not on benefit would provide
an added incentive for them to buy their homes and escape from the
net altogether.
These reforms will need time to produce results. But the new
arrangements for housing revenue accounts are applying a beneficial
new discipline to local authorities. And deregulation of the private
rented sector will increase the supply of rented housing gradually, as
ideological hostility to private landlordism recedes.* But I have to say
that I had expected more from ‘tenants’ choice’ and from HATs. The
obstacle to both was the same: the deep-rooted hostility of the Left to
the improvement and enfranchisement of those who lived in the
ghettoes of dependency which they controlled. The propaganda
against ‘tenants’ choice’, however, was as nothing compared with that
directed against HATs and, sadly, the House of Lords gave the Left the
opportunity they needed.
Their lordships amended our legislation to require that a HAT could
only go ahead if a majority of eligible tenants voted for it. This would
have been an impossibly high hurdle, given the apathy of many
tenants and the intimidation of the Left. We finished up by accepting
the principle of a ballot, limiting it to the requirement of a majority of
those voting. In the summer of 1988 Nick Ridley announced proposals
to set up six HATs, of which — after receiving consultants’ reports —
he decided to go ahead with four in Lambeth, Southwark, Sunderland
and Leeds. I later saw some of the propaganda by left-wing tenants’
groups — strongly backed by the trade unions — which showed how
effective their campaigns had been to spread alarm among tenants
who were now worried about what would happen when they moved
out as their flats were refurbished and about levels of rents and
security of tenure. One would never have guessed that we were
offering huge sums of taxpayers’ money — it would probably have
worked out at £100 million a HAT — to improve the conditions of
people living in some of the worst housing in the country.
Accordingly, the proposals for HATs in Sunderland, Sandwell,
Lambeth, Leeds and finally Southwark had to be dropped, though we

knew that a number of local authorities — even Labour-controlled
ones — would have liked to obtain access to the HATs money if they
could have overcome the opposition of the militants. As a result, no
HATs were set up while I was Prime Minister, though three have been
since I left office.
FURTHER STEPS IN HOUSING POLICY
By the time of the July 1989 reshuffle the problems with the
implementation of our 1987 manifesto housing reforms were all too
apparent and it was clear that we should take stock and seek new
ways of achieving our objectives. Unfortunately, in Chris Patten as the
new Environment Secretary I had someone whose energies were
principally (and rightly) directed at trying to smooth out the
introduction of the community charge and who in any case was less
interested in housing policy than in his other departmental
responsibilities. This is not, though, to say that innovative thinking
had come to a halt.
Since the spring of 1988 Peter Walker in Wales had been pressing a
scheme which he christened ‘flexi-ownership’ under which public
sector tenants unable to exercise the ‘Right to Buy’ — even with the
large discounts available — would be able to acquire equity stakes in
their homes that would increase as the years went by and whose value
would be updated in line with local house prices. Initially, I had
doubts about the idea — on financial grounds, in that people might
choose to use this route rather than the ‘Right to Buy’ and sales and
receipts would fall; on political grounds, in that those who had already
exercised the ‘Right to Buy’ and made the sacrifices required to do so
would be resentful. Both the DoE and the Treasury were strongly
against. In Scotland, another variant on the same idea — called ‘Rents
to Mortgages’ — had been devised. Under this, rent payments — less a
sum for repair and maintenance — would be converted into mortgage
repayments.
We discussed the possibilities of both schemes in the summer and
autumn of 1988. Scotland was a different case from Wales, for — as I
shall explain — home ownership was much lower. Another difference
was that in Scotland the Government through ‘Scottish Homes’ was
itself a substantial landlord: so no new legislation was needed. I
therefore agreed to a Scottish experiment on these lines, while holding
fire on Wales.
The ever ingenious Peter Walker now put his ingenuity to good use.
He devised a similar Welsh scheme which would operate through the
Development Board for Rural Wales at Newtown Powys. The DoE and
the Treasury still objected on the ground that the idea could not in the
end be limited to Wales and that if it were applied in England
substantial ‘Right to Buy’ sales revenues would be lost. But I could see
its political attractions; it was fairly modest, and, in any case, it was

Peter Walker’s brainchild and I thought he should be allowed to go
ahead. I agreed to this at the end of June 1989.
The most disturbing political issue in housing at this time, however,
was homelessness. It should immediately be said that the alarmingly
large figures for the ‘homeless’ did not by definition reflect the number
of people without roofs over their heads. Rather, the published
‘homelessness’ figures described the number of people in certain
statutorily determined ‘priority groups’ who were accepted for
housing. In other words, far from being homeless they had homes
provided by local councils. Sad as the cases of some of these people
might be, the problem which worried the general public — and me too
— was the growing number of people (especially young people)
sleeping rough on the streets of London and other big cities, who were
better described as ‘roofless’.
While it was certainly true that there was an insufficiency of shortterm ‘direct access’ hostel accommodation — as opposed to the larger,
more traditional hostels — and while it was true that the shortage of
private rented accommodation had worsened because of rent control,
this was essentially a problem of wider social, not housing, policy. Nor
are behavioural problems solved by bricks and mortar. I was not
prepared to endorse changes in social security benefits relating to the
under-25s which were suggested by Tony Newton and the Social
Security Department: I thought it vital that we should not add to the
already too evident lure of the big city for young people. We wanted
them back with their families, not in London living on benefits. I urged
the Department of the Environment to bring in the voluntary
organizations to see what they rather than the state could do. I was
also convinced that far too many disturbed people, who should have
been in institutions, had fallen through the central and local
government safety net and found themselves with nowhere to go.

In November 1989 Chris Patten announced a package which
provided £250 million over two years to London and the South-East,
the areas with the worst problems, with help also to improve the
management of empty properties by councils and housing associations.
But I insisted that whatever Government did to help, there must be a
stick as well as a carrot. Crowds of drunken, dirty, often abusive and
sometimes violent men must not be allowed to turn central areas of
the capital into no-go zones for ordinary citizens. The police must
disperse them and prevent their coming back once it was clear that
accommodation was available. Unfortunately, there was a persistent
tendency in polite circles to consider all the ‘roofless’ as victims of
middle-class society, rather than middle-class society as victim of the
‘roofless’.
At the end of July 1990 I asked Chris Patten and Michael Spicer, the
Housing minister, to come in and discuss with me the whole of our
housing policy — both about where we stood on existing initiatives
and where we should go from here. I pinpointed three specific areas —

what to do about improving the condition of council estates, whether
to extend ‘flexi-ownership’ (or ‘Rents to Mortgages’) in England, and
the timetable for getting ‘roofless’ people off the streets and into
decent accommodation. In September Chris Patten duly submitted a
paper containing his latest thinking. It was immediately clear to me
that there were some important differences between his — or more
accurately the DoE’s — approach and mine; this was confirmed when
he and Michael Spicer came in to see me later that month.
The extension of home ownership over the last decade had been one
of the Government’s greatest successes. It had (in England) risen from
57 to 68 per cent of the housing stock. ‘Right to Buy’ sales were still
running at about 80,000 a year. Councils had almost completely
stopped building new houses and were now concentrating on
renovation, a trend which would be accelerated by the new housing
finance system. Nine councils had transferred all or part of their
housing stock to housing associations — though not in the major
urban areas. What was clear, however, was that the DoE saw all this as
raising more problems than it solved. In their view — something,
indeed, which never seemed to alter — there was a ‘housing shortage’
which required the public sector to provide more new low-cost homes
to meet the ‘demand’ from a growing number of households.
Consequently, measures to increase home ownership — such as the
‘flexi-ownership’ proposal which would be particularly attractive to
poorer families — were considered undesirable because they would
reduce the supply of cheap local authority housing to rent. This
analysis failed to grasp that selling a house to a tenant reduced the
demand for as well as the supply of rented housing and that more
home ownership — even partial ownership with a small equity stake
— would make even quite bad estates that much more tolerable, as the
pride of ownership improved the neighbourhood. More seriously, it
also assumed that the ‘demand’ for housing was finite, which was not
true if housing was subsidized. Indeed, perverse incentives were
operating to encourage the break up of large households and the
formation of new smaller ones, for instance in the treatment of the
housing needs of unmarried pregnant mothers. To analyse demand and
supply without considering the effect of price was a perfect
prescription for policy failure.
The other difference of analysis lay in our opposing views of the role
of local authorities. The DoE envisaged the main thrust of renovation
coming from the extension of the Estate Action programme — which
worked through local authorities — under which money was provided
to improve the worst estates. Many of these individual schemes were
good and imaginative. Indeed, I went further than the DoE in believing
that the design of estates was crucial to their success and to reducing
the amount of crime. I was a great admirer of the work of Professor
Alice Coleman in this area and I had her made an adviser to the DoE,
to their dismay. But what I did not believe was that local authorities

should be the main agents for improvement. My Policy Unit was
working on an interesting alternative route which would have
combined a new QUANGO — at arms length from the DoE and not in
collusion with the local authorities — which would have backed
‘Community Housing Trusts’. The latter were schemes which we
envisaged would combine public and private investment to upgrade
the infrastructure of the estate, give residents an equity stake in their
homes and under which the estates would be managed by a
commercial company. It would thus be a different route to the
objective for which HATs had been created, but this time bringing in
private enterprise from the start and giving residents a direct financial
stake in its success.
The September 1990 discussion with Chris Patten and Michael
Spicer was not an inspiring one. Michael was keen to concentrate on
new measures to revive the private rented sector. I agreed with him on
this, but I thought that in the short term it was more important to
tackle the problems of public sector housing. Chris, I suspect, thought
that the best way of doing this was simply to build more public sector
houses. In any case, he seemed content to work within the present
local authority dominated framework. After the meeting I had a
discussion with my advisers and penned a personal minute to Chris
Patten in which I noted my disappointment. I added:
I am not persuaded that we are yet being sufficiently bold in carrying
forward promising and practical policy initiatives in the short term; nor have
we yet explored with the necessary thoroughness and vision the full range of
policy options for the longer term.

I drew particular attention to the importance of extending home
ownership through the ‘Right to Buy’, ‘Rents to Mortgages’ and homesteading — providing people with the money to renovate and then
become the owners of derelict properties. I reaffirmed that I wanted to
get local authorities out of managing and owning housing. It was clear
to me that we must now get back to the kind of fundamental policy
thinking which Nick Ridley — now no longer a member of the
Government — had once supplied. I said that I was going to call in
outside experts and businessmen to talk through all these issues at a
dinner which Chris would, of course, attend; but I had left No. 10
before the planned dinner could take place. The inertia of the DoE had
won out in the end.
REFORMING THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE (NHS)
Housing, like Education, had been at the top of the list for reform in
1987. But I had reserved Health for detailed consideration later. I
believed that the NHS was a service of which we could genuinely be
proud. It delivered a high quality of care — especially when it came to
acute illnesses — and at a reasonably modest unit cost, at least
compared with some insurance-based systems. Yet there were large

and on the face of it unjustifiable differences between performance in
one area and another. Consequently, I was much more reluctant to
envisage fundamental changes than I was in the nation’s schools.
Although I wanted to see a flourishing private sector of health
alongside the National Health Service, I always regarded the NHS and
its basic principles as a fixed point in our policies. And so, whereas I
felt under no obligation to defend the performance of our schools
when criticism was made, I peppered my speeches and interviews with
the figures for extra doctors, dentists and midwives, patients treated,
operations performed and new hospitals built. I felt that on this record
we ought to be able to stand our ground.
Some of the political difficulties we faced on the Health Service
could be put down to exploitation of hard cases by Opposition
politicians and the press. But there was, of course, more to it than that.
There was bound to be a potentially limitless demand for health care
(in the broadest sense) for as long as it was provided free at the point
of delivery. The number of elderly people — the group who made
greatest call on the NHS — was increasing and this added to the
pressure. Advances in medicine opened up the possibility of- and
demand for — new and often expensive forms of treatment.
In significant ways, the NHS lacked the right economic signals to
respond to these pressures. Dedicated its staff generally were; cost
conscious they were not. Indeed, there was no reason why doctors,
nurses or patients should be in a monolithic state-provided system.
Moreover, although people who were seriously ill could usually rely
on first-class treatment, in other ways there was too little sensitivity to
the preferences and convenience of patients.
If one were to recreate the National Health Service, starting from
fundamentals, one would have allowed for a bigger private sector —
both at the level of general practitioners (GPs) and in the provision of
hospitals; and one would have given much closer consideration to
additional sources of finance for health, apart from general taxation.
But we were not faced by an empty slate. The NHS was a huge
organization which inspired at least as much affection as exasperation,
whose emergency services reassured even those who hoped they
would not have to use them, and whose basic structure was felt by
most people to be sound. Any reforms must not undermine public
confidence.
I had had several long-range discussions with Norman Fowler, then
Secretary of State at the DHSS, in the summer and autumn of 1986
about the future of the National Health Service. It was a time of
renewed interest in the economics of health care. Professor Alain
Enthoven of Stanford University had been advancing ideas about
creating an internal market in the NHS, whereby market disciplines
would be applied even though a full-scale free market would not.
Some of the think-tanks were refining these concepts. So there was
much to talk about. Norman provided a paper which I discussed with

him and others at the end of January 1987. The objective of reform,
which we even now distinguished as central, was that we should work
towards a new way of allocating money within the NHS, so that
hospitals treating more patients received more income. There also
needed to be a closer, clearer connection between the demand for
health care, its cost and the method for paying for it. We discussed
whether the NHS might be funded by a ‘health stamp’ rather than
through general taxation. Yet these were very theoretical debates. I
did not believe that we were yet in a position to advance significant
proposals for the manifesto. I was not even sure that we would be able
to do so at an early stage in the next Parliament. Even the possibility
of a Royal Commission — not a device which I would generally have
preferred but one which had been used by the previous Labour
Government in considering the Health Service — held some attractions
for me.
Norman Fowler was much better at publicly defending the NHS than
he would have been at reforming it. But his successor, John Moore,
was very keen to have a fundamental review. John and I had our first
general discussion on the subject at the end of July 1987. At this stage
I still wanted him to concentrate on trying to ensure better value for
money from the existing system. But as the year went on it became
clear to me also that we needed to have a proper long-term review.
During the winter of 1987–8 the press began serving up horror stories
about the NHS on a daily basis. I asked for a note from the DHSS on
where the extra money the Government had provided was actually
going. Instead, I received a report on all of the extra pressures which
the NHS was facing — not at all the same thing. I said that the DHSS
must make a real effort to respond quickly to the attacks on our record
and the performance of the NHS. After all, we had increased real
spending on the NHS by 40 per cent in less than a decade.
But the pressure to provide more money for the Health Service was
proving all but irresistible. Many of the District Health Authorities
(DHAs)* which ran the hospitals overspent in the first half of the year
and then cut back by closing wards and postponing operations. They
promptly blamed us, publicizing the sad cases of patients whose
operations had been postponed, or, in the ghoulish phrase used among
doctors, ‘shroud waving’. It seemed that the NHS had become a
bottomless financial pit. If more money had to be provided, I was
determined that there must at least be strings attached — and the best
way those strings could be woven together was in the form of a full
scale NHS review.
There was another strong reason for favouring a review at this time.
There was good evidence that public opinion accepted that the NHS’s
problems went far deeper than a need for more cash. Many of our
critics in the press admitted as much. If we acted quickly we could
take the initiative, put reforms in place and see benefits flowing from
them before the next election.

There was a setback, however, before the review had even been
decided on. John Moore fell seriously ill with pneumonia in
November, almost collapsing during a meeting at No. 10. With
characteristic gallantry, John insisted on returning to work as soon as
he could — in my view too soon. Not fully recovered, he could never
bring enough energy to bear on the complex and arduous process of
reform and produced several below par performances in the Commons.
The tragedy of this was that his ideas for reform were in general the
right ones, and indeed he deserves much more of the credit for the
final package than he has ever been given.
I made the final decision to go ahead with a Health review at the
end of January 1988: we would set up a ministerial group, which I
would chair. I made it clear from the start that medical care should
continue to be readily available to all who needed it and free at the
point of consumption. The review would seek to reform the
administrative structure of the NHS so that the best of intentions could
become the best of practice. With this in mind I set out four principles
which should inform its work. First, there must be a high standard of
medical care available to all, regardless of income. Second, the
arrangements agreed must be such as to give the users of health
services, whether in the private or the public sectors, the greatest
possible choice. Third, any changes must be made in such a way that
they led to genuine improvements in health care, not just to higher
incomes for those working in the Health Service. Fourth,
responsibility, whether for medical decisions or for budgets, should be
exercised at the lowest appropriate level closest to the patient.
The ministerial group met first in February. John Moore and Tony
Newton represented the DHSS with Nigel Lawson and John Major for
the Treasury, working with officials and advisers. Twelve background
papers were commissioned covering consultants’ contracts, financial
information, efficiency audit, waiting times and the scope for
increased charging. The Treasury representatives were especially keen
on increasing and extending charges throughout the NHS. This would
have discredited any other proposals for reform and ditched the
review. I stamped firmly on it. Otherwise, the danger quickly appeared
that we had too much information before us on secondary matters and
too little about the principles of reform. Accordingly, I asked John
Moore for a paper on the long-term options for the NHS for my next
meeting. This duly arrived in mid-March and set out the very differing
routes along which we might go.
For intellectual completeness all such reviews list virtually every
conceivable bright idea for reform. This contained, if I recall aright,
about eighteen. But the serious possibilities boiled down to two broad
approaches in John Moore’s paper. On the one hand we could attempt
to reform the way the NHS was financed, perhaps by wholly replacing
the existing tax-based system with insurance or, less radically, by
providing tax incentives to individuals who wished to take out cover

privately. There were several possible models. On the other hand, we
could concentrate on reforming the structure of the NHS, leaving the
existing system of finance more or less unchanged. Or we could seek
to combine changes of both kinds.
I decided early in the review that the emphasis should be on
changing the structure of the NHS rather than its finance. There was,
admittedly, some attraction in the idea of funding the NHS by national
insurance or an hypothecated tax, which would have brought home to
people the true cost of health care and, under some models, allowed
them to contract out of certain state services if they chose. In the early
stages John Moore and the DHSS strongly favoured such a contracted
out, hypothecated tax model for the not very mysterious reason that it
would have guaranteed them a large, stable and increasing income for
the DHSS. In effect, the DHSS would have contracted out of the annual
public spending round. It was a real mystery, however, why the
Treasury seemed to smile on such an approach in the early stages. If
we rule out genuine disinterested intellectual curiosity, perhaps
unfairly, the Treasury’s motive may have been to strike an alliance
with the DHSS in order to get control of the review and curb any
radicalism of which it disapproved. It could then abandon its apparent
support for the hypothecated tax — which indeed is exactly what it
did a month or two into the review. We decided during the summer
that further work on the finance side should concentrate on the
possibility of tax reliefs for private health insurance premiums paid by
the elderly and incentives to boost company health insurance
schemes.*
On the other side of the equation — reforming the structure of the
NHS — two possibilities seemed to have most appeal. The first was the
possible setting-up of ‘Local Health Funds’ (LHFs). These were
essentially a variant on the American idea of Health Maintenance
Organizations (HMOs). People would be free to decide to which LHF
they subscribed. LHFs would offer comprehensive health care services
for their subscribers — whether provided by the LHF itself, purchased
from other LHFs, or purchased from independent suppliers. The
advantage of this system — which was also claimed for the American
HMOs — was that it had built-in incentives for efficiency and so for
keeping down the costs which would otherwise escalate as they had in
some health insurance systems. What was not so clear was whether if
they were public sector bodies there would be any obvious advantage
over a reformed structure of the DHAs.
So I was impressed by a suggestion in John’s paper that we should
make NHS hospitals self-governing and independent of DHA control.
This was a proposal — somewhat more ambitious than that which we
finally adopted — by which all hospitals would (perhaps with limited
exceptions) be contracted out individually or in groups through
charities, privatization or management buy-outs, or perhaps leased to
operating companies formed by the staff. This would loosen the

excessively rigid control of the hospital service from the centre and
introduce greater diversity in the provision of health care. But, most
important, it would create a clear distinction between buyers and
providers. The DHAs would cease to be involved in the provision of
health care and would become buyers, placing contracts with the most
efficient hospitals to provide care for their patients.
This buyer/provider distinction was designed to eliminate the worst
features of the existing system: the absence of incentives to improve
performance and indeed of simple information. The crudity of this
system becomes clear when one realizes that there was at that time
virtually no information about costs within the NHS. We had already
begun to remedy this. But when I asked the DHSS at one review
meeting how long it would be before we had a fully working
information flow and was told six years, I exploded involuntarily:
‘Good heavens! We won the Second World War in six years!’
Within the NHS money was allocated from regions to districts and
then to hospitals by complicated formulas based on theoretical
measures of need. A hospital which treated more patients received no
extra money for doing so; in fact it would be likely to spend over
budget and be forced to cut services. The financial mechanism for
reimbursing DHAs when they treated patients from other areas was to
adjust their future spending allocations several years after the event —
a hopelessly unresponsive system. But with DHAs acting as buyers
money could follow the patient and patients from one area treated in
another would be paid for straight away. Hospitals treating more
patients would generate a higher income and thus improve their
services rather than having to cut back. The resulting competition
between hospitals — both within the NHS and between the public and
private sectors — would increase efficiency and benefit patients.
I held two seminars on the NHS at Chequers — one in March with
doctors and the other in April with administrators — to brief myself
more fully. Then in May we began our next round of discussions with
papers from John Moore and Nigel Lawson.
Nigel took a critical view of John Moore’s ideas. By now, the
Treasury had become thoroughly alarmed that opening up the existing
NHS structure might lead to much higher public expenditure. Despite
apparent Treasury interest earlier in the idea of an ‘internal market’, at
the end of May Nigel sent me a paper questioning the whole direction
of our thinking. John Major followed up the attack with a proposal for
a system of ‘top-slicing’ by which the existing system of allocating
funds to health authorities would continue, but the extra element
provided for growth in the health budget each year would be held
back (‘top-sliced’) and allocated separately to hospitals which fulfilled
performance targets set down from the centre. This was presented as a
more practical and immediate way of realizing the objective of ‘money
following the patient’. It was, of course, nothing of the sort. Relative to
the overall hospital budget the amount of money paid in relation to

performance would have been small. Central control of the hospital
service would if anything have been increased. And there would have
been no attempt to separate buyers from providers — in the short term
at any rate — and thus no real provision to make money follow the
patient. In short, a characteristic Treasury device to assert its central
control of spending and disguise it as extending consumer choice.
In the face of these challenges John Moore did not defend his
approach very robustly and I too began to doubt whether it had been
properly thought through. We had a particularly difficult meeting on
Wednesday 25 May which ended with a decision to commission
further work on ‘top-slicing’. Meanwhile, the Treasury did not have it
all their own way. I asked them for a paper on possible new tax
incentives for the private sector — an idea which Nigel fiercely
opposed.
Nigel’s objection to tax relief for private medical insurance was
essentially twofold. First, he was — as I have said earlier — a
convinced fiscal purist. Tax reliefs in his view distorted the system and
should be eroded and if possible removed. Second, he argued that tax
relief for private health insurance would in many cases help those who
could already afford private cover and so fail to deliver a net increase
in private sector provision. In those cases where it did provide an
incentive, it would increase the demand for health care, but without
corresponding efforts to improve supply the result would just be
higher prices. Neither of these objections was trivial — though taken
to its logical conclusion the Treasury position implied that we should
have been trying to discourage the growth in private sector provision
that was already taking place. In any case, both objections missed the
point that unless we achieved a growth in private sector health care,
which had been slow over the past few years, all the extra demands
would fall to be met by the NHS. In the long term it would be
impossible to resist that pressure and public expenditure would have
to rise much further than it otherwise would. I was not arguing for
across the board tax relief for private health insurance premiums —
though in principle that would be justified — but rather for a targetted
measure. If we could encourage people over sixty to maintain the
health insurance which they had subscribed to before their retirement,
that would reduce the demand on the NHS from the limited group
which put most pressure on its services.
Nor, of course, were we neglecting the ‘supply side’. The whole
approach we were taking in the review was designed to remove
obstacles to supply. And in addition the review was considering a
significant increase in the number of consultants’ posts, which would
have an impact on the private sector as well as the NHS. We had
further plans to tackle restrictive practices and other inefficiencies in
the medical profession, directing the system of merit awards more to
merit and less to retirement bonuses, and we planned the general
introduction of ‘medical audit’.*

Nigel fought hard even against these limited tax reliefs but I got it
through with John Moore’s help in the first part of July. In other areas
I was less happy. The DHSS had been shaken by the Treasury’s
criticisms and responded by seeking to obtain Treasury support for
their proposals at a formative stage before they presented the review.
This gave the Treasury an effective power of veto. Accordingly, the
DHSS put forward, with Treasury agreement, a much more
evolutionary approach. Though money following the patient and selfgoverning hospitals remained goals of policy, they were relegated to
the indefinite future and ‘top-slicing’ took centre stage in the short
term. (Indeed, this idea staggered on, ever more feebly, through
almost the entire length of the review. But it failed in its purpose of
diverting us from a genuine system of money following the patient,
and never made its way into the white paper.)
I had no objection, in principle, to an evolutionary approach to the
introduction of self-governing hospitals. We already had a model from
our education reforms: hospitals could opt out of DHA control while
remaining within the NHS, just as grant-maintained schools opted out
of local authority control while remaining in the state sector. But I was
suspicious of the distinction that was emerging between short-and
long-term changes, generally worried about the slow pace of the
review and thought we were losing our way.
What made me uneasy was that my Policy Unit — which had from
the first championed the three reforms of the buyer/provider
distinction, money following the patient and independent hospital
trusts — presented me with two worrying criticisms. First, we were in
danger of letting these ideas be overwhelmed by Treasury
considerations of short-term cost control. Second, the reforms under
discussion, while vital, extended choice to the doctor and to health
service managers but not to the patient who would continue to be the
dependant of a locally monopolistic DHA. What was needed to remedy
this was some variant of the old idea of the GP as budget holder. In
the Policy Unit’s version, the GP would, like the hospital, be able to
opt out of DHA control and make his own arrangements with hospitals
for the treatment of his patients. The patient would therefore be able
to choose between a GP who held his own budget or one who worked
under the DHA. At first, this idea struck me as too radical, but it
worried me that we seemed, under Treasury pressure, to be moving
away from, rather than towards, radical reforms.
At the end of July 1988 I made the difficult decision to replace John
Moore on the review. I took this opportunity to split the unwieldy
DHSS into separate Health and Social Security departments, leaving
John in charge of the latter and bringing in Ken Clarke as Health
Secretary. There can no question that John had made a very important
contribution to the review. The idea of money following the patient,
the distinction between buyers and providers and the concept of selfgoverning hospitals all emerged in the review during his period as

Secretary of State. Also he had pushed hard for tax reliefs, which Ken
Clarke would not have done. As he was to demonstrate during the
short period in which he was my Secretary of State for Education
(when he publicly discounted my advocacy of education vouchers),
Ken Clarke was a firm believer in state provision. But whatever the
philosophical differences between us, Ken’s appointment was a useful
one. His arrival at the Department of Health undoubtedly helped our
deliberations. He was an extremely effective Health minister — tough
in dealing with vested interests and trade unions, direct and persuasive
in his exposition of government policy.
Ken Clarke now revived the idea which the Policy Unit had been
urging: that GPs should be given budgets. In Ken’s version GPs would
hold budgets to buy from hospitals ‘elective acute services’ — surgery
for non-life-threatening conditions such as hip replacements and
cataract operations. These were the services for which the patient had
(in theory at least) some choice as to timing, location and consultant
and for which GPs could advise between competing providers in the
public and private sector. This approach had a number of advantages.
It would bring the choice of services nearer to patients and make GPs
more responsive to their wishes. It would maintain the traditional
freedom of GPs to decide to which hospitals and consultants they
wanted to refer their patients. It also improved the prospects for
hospitals which had opted to leave DHA control and become selfgoverning: otherwise it was all too likely that if District Health
Authorities were the only buyers they would discriminate against any
of their own hospitals which opted out.
Giving GPs budgets of their own also promised to make it possible
for the first time to put reasonable limits on their spending —
provided we could find ways of having some limit to the number of
GPs within the NHS and to how much they spent on drugs, although
there was always provision for emergencies. Nevertheless, the
Treasury objected to practice budgets, foreseeing the creation of a
powerful new lobby for extra health spending, and argued for a more
direct way of cash limiting GPs. They also doubted whether all GPs
would be able to manage their affairs with sufficient competence and
whether many practices would be big enough to cope financially with
the unpredictabilities of patient needs. If there were such problems,
the patient would suffer.
I myself had initially been cautious and wanted more detail.
However, the more closely we examined the concept of having GPs
shop around for the best quality and value treatment for their patients,
the more fruitful the idea seemed. We decided in the end to proceed
again by an ‘opting out’ mechanism, limiting the option to the larger
GP practices but extending the services covered by budgets beyond
what Ken had originally proposed to include ‘out-patient’ services. We
also gave opted-out practices an additional budget to cover the cost of
prescriptions.

By the autumn of 1988 it was clear to me that the moves to selfgoverning hospitals and GPs’ budgets, the buyer/provider distinction
with the DHA as buyer, and money following the patient were the
pillars on which the NHS could be transformed in the future. They
were the means to provide better and more cost-effective treatment.
A good deal of work had by now been done on the self-governing
hospitals. As with our education reforms, we wanted all hospitals to
have greater responsibility for their affairs but the self-governing
hospitals to be virtually independent within the NHS. I wanted to see
the simplest possible procedure for hospitals to change their status and
become independent — what I preferred to call ‘trust’ — hospitals.
They should also own their assets, though I agreed with the Treasury
that there should be some overall limits on borrowing. It was also
important that the system should be got under way soon and that we
had a significant number of trust hospitals by the time of the next
election. By December we were in the position to start commenting on
the first draft of the white paper which would set out our proposals. In
January 1989 we discussed proposals for giving a proper management
structure to the NHS. Then at the end of the month — after the
twenty-fourth ministerial meeting I had chaired on the subject — the
white paper was finally published.
Henceforth the provision and financing of health care were to be
separated, with money following the patient. The old, overelaborate
and distorting RAWP (Resource Allocation Working Party) funding
system would be ended and replaced by a new system based on
population, weighted for age and health, with some special provision
for London which had its own problems. Hospitals would be free to
opt out of District Health Authority control to become self-governing
trusts, funded from general taxation, free to settle the pay and
conditions of staff and able to sell their services in the public and
private sectors. GPs in large practices would have the opportunity to
hold their own NHS budgets. The remit of the independent Audit
Commission would now be extended to include the NHS. There would
be tax relief for the over-60s on private health insurance premiums.
Throughout the system, more powers would be devolved to local
hospital management.
The white paper proposals essentially simulated within the NHS as
many as possible of the advantages which the private sector and
market choice offered but without privatization, without large-scale
extra charging and without going against those basic principles which
I had set down just before Christmas 1987 as essential to a satisfactory
result. But there was an outcry from the British Medical Association,
health trade unions and the Opposition, based squarely on a deliberate
and self-interested distortion of what we were doing. In the face of this
campaign of misinformation Ken Clarke was the best possible advocate
we would have. Not being a right-winger himself, he was unlikely to
talk the kind of free-market language which might alarm the general

public and play into the hands of the trade unions. But he had the
energy and enthusiasm to argue, explain and defend what we were
doing night after night on television.
What I was less convinced about, however, was whether Ken Clarke
and the Department of Health had really thought through the detailed
implementation of what we were doing and foreseen the transitional
difficulties which might arise as we moved from one system of finance
and organization to another. David Wolfson and others doubted
whether District Health Authorities and hospitals had the information
technology, accounting systems and general administrative expertise
required to cope with the changes. Clearly, if the information on the
flows of patients between districts and the costs of their treatment
were inaccurate the consequences for budgets could be horrendous. I
had papers prepared for me on this and arranged for a presentation
from the Department of Health in June 1990, which I did not find very
reassuring. With all the political problems which the community
charge was causing, we could not afford to run the risk of disruption
in London and the possible closure of hospital wards because the
service was not capable of managing in the new more competitive
environment. In the end, I decided against slowing down the reforms,
while urging that the closest attention should be paid to what was
happening in London.
In their different ways, the white paper reforms will lead to a
fundamental change in the culture of the NHS to the benefit of
patients, taxpayers and those who work in the service. By the time I
left office the results were starting to come through. Fifty-seven
hospitals were in the process of becoming trusts. Moreover, the
political climate was changing. The stridency of the BMA’s campaigns
against our reforms was leading to a backlash among moderate
doctors. The Labour Party had been put on the defensive and had
begun themselves to talk about the need for reforms, though not of
course ours.
I was determined to build on what had been achieved. I had my
Policy Unit working on further proposals. We were considering the
possible further encouragement of private health insurance through
tax reliefs, structural reforms of the NHS to cut bureaucracy, more
contracting-out of NHS ancillary services and — most far reaching —
the introduction of a measure whereby anyone who waited more than
a specified time for certain sorts of operation would be given a credit
from their District Health Authority to be used for treatment either
elsewhere within the NHS or in the private sector. The health debate
was moving on and — for the first time in my lifetime — it was the
Right which was winning it.
THATCHERISM REBUFFED — THE CASE OF SCOTLAND

In Education, Housing and Health the common themes of my policies
were the extension of choice, the dispersal of power and the
encouragement of responsibility. This was the application of a
philosophy not just an administrative programme. Though there were
teething troubles and mistakes along the way, this approach was
successful: it was also popular. Indeed, if it had not been the
Conservative Party would have lost the three general election elections
it fought under my leadership, not won them. But there were regional
exceptions, most notably Scotland. There was no Tartan Thatcherite
revolution.
That might seem strange. For Scotland in the eighteenth century was
the home of the very same Scottish Enlightenment which produced
Adam Smith, the greatest exponent of free enterprise economics till
Hayek and Friedman. It had been a country humming with science,
invention and enterprise — a theme to which I used time and again to
return in my Scottish speeches. But on top of decline in Scotland’s
heavy industry came socialism — intended as cure, but itself
developing quite new strains of social and economic disease, not least
militant trade unionism. Only in the 1980s did things really begin to
change for the better as Britain’s transformed reputation started to
attract foreign — often high technology — companies to Scotland and
Edinburgh became a prosperous financial centre. Earlier, private
enterprise had developed a prosperous and thriving oil industry. Even
then, jobs in uncompetitive industry continued to be shed and
unemployment remained higher than in England.
The fortunes of Scottish Toryism had declined in line with these
long-term economic difficulties. So whereas in 1955 Conservative
candidates took just over 50 per cent of the vote, in 1987 we were
down to 24 per cent. And this reflected short-term as well as long-term
economic conditions. Unemployment in Scotland had only started to
fall four months before the 1987 general election — there was still too
little economic confidence to start a recovery for the Scottish Tories.
There were now only ten Conservative MPs north of the border and
this presented real difficulties in finding enough Tory back-benchers to
take part in the House of Commons Select Committee monitoring the
Scottish Office, which consequently could not be set up at all during
the 1987 Parliament given that there were the ministries of the
Scottish Office to fill. The real question now was whether the falling
unemployment and economic recovery taking place would of
themselves be sufficient to revive the Conservative Party’s fortunes in
Scotland. I never believed that they would and this indeed proved to
be the case. So if it was not all a matter of economics, what was
wrong?
It was certainly possible — even plausible — to point to changes in
social and religious attitudes to explain this decline. The old
Glaswegian Orange foundations of Unionist support which had in
earlier decades been so important had irreparably crumbled.

Moreover, whereas in the past it might have been possible for the
Conservatives in Scotland to rely on a mixture of deference, tradition
and paternalism to see them through, this was just no longer an option
— and none the worse for that. But that did not explain why Scotland
was so different from England now, that is after eight years of Tory
government.
Although there was a much better economic record in Scotland than
was usually admitted, the statistics which were most revealing were
those which showed that about half Scotland’s population were living
in highly subsidized local authority housing compared with about a
quarter in England. In short the conditions of dependency were
strongly present. And the conditions of dependency are conditions for
socialism. In Scotland the Left still formed its own establishment
which intruders challenged at their peril. The Labour Party and the
trade unions had a powerful grip on office and influence at every level
— from the local authorities, through QUANGOs, right into the
Scottish Office. In practice, the Left, not the Right, had held on to the
levers of patronage. It had its arguments voiced by both Catholic and
Protestant churches in Scotland and parrotted in the media — hardly
any Scottish newspapers supported us and the electronic media were
largely hostile.
The reaction of Scottish Office ministers to these difficulties had
cumulatively worsened the problem. Feeling isolated and vulnerable in
the face of so much left-wing hostility, they regularly portrayed
themselves as standing up for Scotland against me and the parsimony
of Whitehall. Yielding to this temptation brought instant gratification
but long-term grief. For in adopting this tactic they increased the
underlying Scottish antipathy to the Conservative Party and indeed the
Union. The pride of the Scottish Office — whose very structure added
a layer of bureaucracy, standing in the way of the reforms which were
paying such dividends in England — was that public expenditure per
head in Scotland was far higher than in England. But they never
seemed to grasp — as their opponents certainly did — that if public
spending was a ‘good thing’ there should be lots more of it. That
effectively conceded the fundamental argument to the socialists. But
the truth was that more public spending in a dependency culture had
not solved Scotland’s problems, but added to them.
There was only one answer. If a small state, low taxes, less
intervention and more choice were right then we should argue for
them and do so without apology. There must also be the same drive to
implement this programme north as south of the border.
George Younger (who for all his decency and common sense was
very much of the paternalist school of Scottish Tory politician) left the
Scottish Office in 1986 to become Secretary of State for Defence.
Malcolm Rifkind was the heir apparent. But I appointed him with
mixed feelings. He had been a passionate supporter of Scottish
devolution when we were in Opposition. He was one of the Party’s

most brilliant and persuasive debaters. No one could doubt his
intellect or his grasp of ideas. Unfortunately he was as sensitive and
highly strung as he was eloquent. His judgement was erratic and his
behaviour unpredictable. Nor did he implement the radical
Thatcherite approach he publicly espoused; for espouse it he certainly
did. After the 1987 election Malcolm made speeches up and down
Scotland attacking dependency and extolling enterprise. But as
political pressures mounted he changed his tune.
The real powerhouse for Thatcherism at the Scottish Office was
Michael Forsyth, whom I appointed a Parliamentary Under-Secretary
in 1987, with responsibility for Scottish Education and Health. It was
Michael, Brian Griffiths and I who were convinced of the need to
intervene to protect Paisley Grammar School — a popular school of
high academic standards and traditional ethos — which (doubtless for
these very reasons) the socialist Strathclyde Council wanted to close. I
was moved by the appeals I received from the staff and parents. I also
saw this as a test case. We must show that we were not prepared to see
the Scottish left-wing establishment lord it over people it was our duty
to protect. I sent a personal minute to Malcolm Rifkind on Friday 22
January 1988 registering the strength of my views. As a result of my
intervention regulations were laid so that where a Scottish education
authority proposed to close, change the site or vary the catchment
area of any school where the number of pupils at the school was
greater than 80 per cent of its capacity, the proposal should be
referred to the Secretary of State for Scotland.
I also had to take a very firm line on the issue of whether Scottish
schools should be allowed to opt out of local authority control, like
their English counterparts. Before this could happen in Scotland,
school boards in which parents had a powerful role had to be
substituted for the direct local authority control which had previously
existed. But once this had been done and schools had effective
governing bodies there was no reason to prevent their seeking grantmaintained status. Yet Malcolm resisted this. After receiving advice
from the parliamentary business managers about the pressure on the
legislative timetable, I reluctantly agreed that opting out provisions
should not be included in his first Education Bill. But I pressed that
such a provision should be included in the next session’s Scottish
Education Bill. Malcolm claimed that there was not sufficient demand
for opting out in Scotland. However, from my postbag and Brian
Griffiths’s enquiries I knew otherwise. I insisted and had my way. In
1989 legislation was accordingly introduced to bring the opportunity
of grant-maintained schools to Scotland.
Whatever the obstruction from Malcolm Rifkind, Michael Forsyth
and I were not alone in believing that real changes to reduce the role
of the state in Scotland were both necessary and possible. In housing,
for example, ‘Scottish Homes’ — established in May 1989 —
developed attractive and imaginative schemes to provide more choice

for public sector tenants and to renovate run-down houses, selling
some and letting others. Indeed, the organization generally proved
more innovative than DoE efforts through Estate Action programmes
in England. As regards the Government’s role in industry, Bill Hughes
— Chairman of the Scottish CBI whom I later appointed Deputy
Chairman of the Scottish Conservative Party — devised ‘Scottish
Enterprise’, which mobilized private sector business to take over the
functions of the old, more interventionist, Scottish Development
Agency and other bodies.
I became convinced, however, that it was only by having someone
who shared my commitment to fundamental change in Scotland
spearheading the Party’s efforts there that real progress would be
made. I did not want to move Malcolm Rifkind who, for better or
worse, had established himself as a major political force. But the
Chairman of the Scottish Conservative Party, Sir James (now Lord)
Goold, for whose loyalty and dependability I always had the highest
regard, had told me that he wished to stand down when I had found a
suitable successor. Both he and I believed that that successor was now
available in the form of Michael Forsyth.
Malcolm, however, was strongly opposed to this. I discussed the
matter with him in January 1989. He went away to think of his own
preferred candidates and decided to press for the appointment of
Professor Ross Harper, shortly to be chosen as President of the Scottish
Conservative and Unionist Association, the top post of the voluntary
party in Scotland. Malcolm repeatedly argued that Michael Forsyth
could not be spared from his ministerial duties in the Scottish Office. I
was not satisfied by this and insisted that Michael should become
Chairman. He could run his ministerial duties in parallel, as others had
done before him. So in July I overrode Malcolm Rifkind’s objections
and appointed Michael Chairman and Bill Hughes his Deputy.
Michael was the only Conservative politician in Scotland whom the
Labour Party really feared. He was, therefore, bound to be the object
of unrelenting attack in the left-wing media. But it was the opposition
he faced from Conservatives which was to prove his undoing. The
personal friction between him and Malcolm became steadily worse. A
full-scale campaign of vilification was launched by Michael’s enemies
and the Scottish press was full of talk of splits and factions.
Malcolm Rifkind now also fell back with a vengeance on the old
counterproductive tactic of proving his Scottish virility by posturing as
Scotland’s defender against Thatcherism. In March 1990, John Major
delivered his first budget. Coming on the eve of the introduction of the
community charge in England and Wales, it doubled from £8,000 to
£16,000 the amount of savings a person could have and still not lose
entitlement to community charge benefit. This reflected the argument
— with which I had much sympathy — that too great a squeeze was
being exerted on those who had been prudent enough to put aside
some savings. Malcolm Rifkind raised no objection when this was

announced to Cabinet before the budget. Nor did he make any special
demands for Scotland. But the announcement provoked an outcry in
Scotland where the community charge had been introduced one year
earlier and where the critics accordingly wanted the community
charge benefit change backdated. Under fire, Malcolm did not stand
by John Major’s decision. He now entered into heavily leaked
discussions with me and John to have the change made retrospective
for Scotland. Very reluctantly, I agreed that a special payment should
be made to those concerned in Scotland from within the Scottish Office
budget. Having damaged the reception of John’s skilfully conceived
budget, Malcolm then went on to revel publicly in Scotland in his
‘victory’. It was suggested that he had only secured these changes by
threatening resignation. He also told the press that I had fallen into
line with his better judgement. This childish behaviour did the
Conservative cause in Scotland great harm and prompted letters of
protest from outraged Scottish Tories.
In May he entered into a public row with the British Steel
Corporation over the future of the Ravenscraig steel plant, which
should have been a matter for BSC to decide on commercial grounds,
and even went so far — I was told — as to ask Scottish Conservative
back-benchers to vote for a Labour Early Day Motion in the House of
Commons on the subject. At the Scottish Party Conference the week
before Malcolm also made some delphic remarks which were
interpreted as suggesting that devolution was back on the agenda in
Scotland. He was reverting to type.
The pressure on me to get rid of Michael Forsyth mounted during
the summer of 1990. He himself was becoming depressed at the
constant difficulties with Malcolm Rifkind and the unrelenting
campaign pursued against him and his supporters. In August my office
was flooded with letters from friends and opponents of Michael,
obviously being geared up by their respective factions. By now it was
clear that the opposition to him had enlisted the Scottish Tory Party
establishment including Willie Whitelaw, George Younger and the
senior members of the voluntary party. I had my own troubles. It had
been a brave attempt to bring the Scottish Tory Party into the latter
half of the twentieth century and offer leadership and vision to people
who had become all too used to losing or — even worse — winning on
their opponents’ terms. In October 1990 I promoted Michael Forsyth
to be a Minister of State at the Scottish Office with extended duties
and replaced him as Chairman with (Lord) Russell Sanderson who
relinquished his ministerial job at the Scottish Office. His appointment
was taken as a sign that the attempt to extend Thatcherism to Scotland
had come to an end. This combination of the Left and the traditional
establishment of the Party to rebuff Thatcherism in Scotland was a
prelude to the formation of the same alliance to oust me as leader of
the Conservative Party a few weeks later — although I did not know it
at the time.

The balance sheet of Thatcherism in Scotland is a lopsided one:
economically positive but politically negative. After a decade of
Thatcherism, Scotland had been economically transformed for the
better. People moved in large numbers from the older declining
industries such as steel and shipbuilding to new industries with a
future such as electronics and finance. Almost all the economic
statistics — productivity, inward investment, self-employment —
showed a marked improvement. As a result, Scottish living standards
reached an all-time high, rising by 30 per cent from 1981 to 1989,
outperforming most of the English regions.
A slower start was made on reducing dependency and encouraging
ownership. As late as 1979 only a third of Scots owned their own
home. By the time I had left office this had risen to over half — thanks
in part to the ‘Right to Buy’ scheme. And we had begun to enable still
more local authority tenants to become home owners through ‘Rents
to Mortgages’.
Yet however valuable socially those initiatives were, they had little
political impact. The 1992 election showed that the fall in Tory
support had been halted; it had yet to be reversed. Some part of this
unpopularity must be attributed to the national question on which the
Tories are seen as an English party and on which I myself was
apparently seen as a quintessential English figure.
About the second point I could — and I can — do nothing. I am
what I am and I have no intention of wearing tartan camouflage. Nor
do I think that most Scots would like me, or any English politician, the
better for doing so. The Tory Party is not, of course, an English party
but a Unionist one. If it sometimes seems English to some Scots that is
because the Union is inevitably dominated by England by reason of its
greater population. The Scots, being an historic nation with a proud
past, will inevitably resent some expressions of this fact from time to
time. As a nation, they have an undoubted right to national selfdetermination; thus far they have exercised that right by joining and
remaining in the Union. Should they determine on independence no
English party or politician would stand in their way, however much
we might regret their departure. What the Scots (nor indeed the
English) cannot do, however, is to insist upon their own terms for
remaining in the Union, regardless of the views of the others. If the
rest of the United Kingdom does not favour devolved government,
then the Scottish nation may seek to persuade the rest of us of its
virtues; it may even succeed in doing so; but it cannot claim
devolution as a right of nationhood inside the Union.
It is understandable that when I come out with these kind of hard
truths many Scots should resent it. But it has nothing whatever to do
with my being English. A lot of Englishmen resent it too.
*
*

See p. 39.

For the arguments about the terminology see pp. 570–1.

*
*
*

See my speech to Rand Afrikans University in May 1991.
See p. 571.

See pp. 670–1.

The Department of Health and Social Security (later Health alone) was responsible for
strategic planning of health care in England and Wales. Below it are the Regional
Health Authorities (RHAs) responsible for a number of special services, major capital
projects and regional planning, and below them are District Health Authorities, whose
functions are discussed below. General practitioners, dentists, pharmacists, and
opticians are the responsibility of separate bodies, now known as Family Health
Service Authorities. In Scotland there is a single tier of Health Boards under the
Scottish Office.
*

We also looked briefly at the idea of a national lottery to help fund the NHS. But
while I saw some value in local lotteries to help the voluntary sector raise small
amounts for particular projects, I did not like a National Health lottery because I did
not think that the Government should encourage more gambling, let alone link it to
people’s health.
*

‘Medical audit’ is a process by which the quality of medical care provided by
individual doctors is assessed by their peers.
*

CHAPTER XXI

Not So Much a Programme, More a Way of Life
Family policy, the Arts, Broadcasting, Science and the Environment

INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
The surge of prosperity — most of it soundly based but some of it
unsustainable — which occurred from 1986 to 1989 had one
paradoxical effect. Deprived for the moment at least of the opportunity
to chastise the Government and blame free enterprise capitalism for
failing to create jobs and raise living standards, the Left turned their
attention to non-economic issues. The idea that the state was the
engine of economic progress was discredited — and ever more so as
the failures of communism became more widely known. But was the
price of capitalist prosperity too high? Was it not resulting in a gross
and offensive materialism, traffic congestion and pollution? Were not
the attitudes required to get on in Thatcher’s Britain causing the weak
to be marginalized, homelessness to grow, communities to break
down? In short, was not the ‘quality of life’ being threatened?
I found all this misguided and hypocritical. If socialism had
produced economic success those same critics would have been
celebrating in the streets. But socialism had failed. And it was the
poorer, weaker members of society who had suffered worst as a result
of that failure. More than that, however, socialism, in spite of the
high-minded rhetoric in which its arguments were framed, had played
on the worst aspects of human nature. It had literally demoralized
communities and families, offering dependency in place of
independence as well as subjecting traditional values to sustained
derision. It was a cynical ploy for the Left to start talking as if they
were old-fashioned Tories, fighting to preserve decency amid social
disintegration.
But nor could the arguments be ignored. Some Conservatives were
always tempted to appease the Left’s social arguments — just as before
I became leader they had appeased their economic arguments — on
the grounds that we ourselves were very nearly as socialist in practice.
These were the people who thought that the answer to every criticism
was for the state to spend and intervene more. I could not accept this.
There was a case for the state to intervene in specific instances — for
example to protect children in real danger from malign parents. The
state must uphold the law and ensure that criminals were punished —
an area in which I was deeply uneasy, for our streets were becoming
more not less violent, in spite of large increases in police numbers and
prison places. But the root cause of our contemporary social problems

— to the extent that these did not reflect the timeless influence and
bottomless resources of old-fashioned human wickedness — was that
the state had been doing too much. A Conservative social policy had to
recognize this. Society was made up of individuals and communities. If
individuals were discouraged and communities disorientated by the
state stepping in to take decisions which should properly be made by
people, families and neighbourhoods then society’s problems would
grow not diminish.
This belief was what lay behind my remarks in an interview with a
woman’s magazine — which caused a storm of abuse at the time —
about there being ‘no such thing as society’. But they never quoted the
rest. I went on to say:
There are individual men and women, and there are families. And no
government can do anything except through people, and people must look to
themselves first. It’s our duty to look after ourselves and then to look after
our neighbour.

My meaning, clear at the time but subsequently distorted beyond
recognition, was that society was not an abstraction, separate from the
men and women who composed it, but a living structure of
individuals, families, neighbours and voluntary associations. I
expected great things from society in this sense because I believed that
as economic wealth grew, individuals and voluntary groups should
assume more responsibility for their neighbours’ misfortunes. The
error to which I was objecting was the confusion of society with the
state as the helper of first resort. Whenever I heard people complain
that ‘society’ should not permit some particular misfortune, I would
retort, ‘And what are you doing about it, then?’ Society for me was not
an excuse, it was a source of obligation.
I was an individualist in the sense that I believed that individuals
are ultimately accountable for their actions and must behave like it.
But I always refused to accept that there was some kind of conflict
between this kind of individualism and social responsibility. I was
reinforced in this view by the writings of conservative thinkers in the
United States on the growth of an ‘underclass’ and the development of
a dependency culture. If irresponsible behaviour does not involve
penalty of some kind, irresponsibility will for a large number of people
become the norm. More important still, the attitudes may be passed on
to their children, setting them off in the wrong direction.
I had great regard for the Victorians for many reasons — not least
their civic spirit to which the increase in voluntary and charitable
societies and the great buildings and endowments of our cities pay
eloquent tribute. I never felt uneasy about praising ‘Victorian values’
or — the phrase I originally used — ‘Victorian virtues’, not least
because they were by no means just Victorian. But the Victorians also
had a way of talking which summed up what we were now
rediscovering — they distinguished between the ‘deserving’ and the
‘undeserving poor’. Both groups should be given help: but it must be

help of very different kinds if public spending is not just going to
reinforce the dependency culture. The problem with our welfare state
was that — perhaps to some degree inevitably — we had failed to
remember that distinction and so we provided the same ‘help’ to those
who had genuinely fallen into difficulties and needed some support till
they could get out of them, as to those who had simply lost the will or
habit of work and self-improvement. The purpose of help must not be
to allow people merely to live a half-life, but to restore their selfdiscipline and through that their self-esteem.
I was also impressed by the writing of the American theologian and
social scientist Michael Novak who put into new and striking language
what I had always believed about individuals and communities. Mr
Novak stressed the fact that what he called ‘democratic capitalism’ was
a moral and social, not just an economic system, that it encouraged a
range of virtues and that it depended upon co-operation not just ‘going
it alone’. These were important insights which, along with our
thinking about the effects of the dependency culture, provided the
intellectual basis for my approach to those great questions brought
together in political parlance as ‘the quality of life’.
THE FAMILY
The fact that the arguments deployed against the kind of economy and
society which my policies were designed to foster were muddled and
half-baked did not, of course, detract from the fact that there were
social ills and that in some respects these were becoming more serious.
I have mentioned the rise in crime. The Home Office and liberal
opinion more generally were inclined to cast doubt on this. Certainly,
it was possible to point to similar trends throughout the West and to
worse criminality in American cities. It was also arguable that the rise
in the number of recorded crimes reflected a greater willingness to
report crimes — rape for example — which would previously have not
come to the attention of the police. But I was never greatly impressed
by arguments which minimized the extent and significance of crime. I
shared the view of the general public that more must be done to
apprehend and punish those who committed it. I believed that while it
was right that those who did not really need to go to prison should be
punished in other ways, violent criminals must be given exemplary
sentences. In this regard the measure we introduced in which I took
greatest satisfaction was the provision in the 1988 Criminal Justice Act
which empowered the Attorney-General to appeal against overlenient
sentences passed by the Crown Court.
The fact that the level of crime rose in times of recession and of
prosperity alike gave the lie to the notion that poverty explained — or
even justified — criminal behaviour. Arguably, the opposite might
have been true: greater prosperity led to more opportunities to steal.
In any case, the rise in violent crime could not in any sense be

regarded as an economic phenomenon. Nor could the alarming levels
of juvenile delinquency. These had their origins deeper in society.
I became increasingly convinced during the last two or three years
of my time in office that, though there were crucially important limits
to what politicians could do in this area, we could only get to the roots
of crime and much else besides by concentrating on strengthening the
traditional family. The statistics told their own story. One in four
children were born to unmarried parents. No fewer than one in five
children experienced a parental divorce before they were sixteen. Of
course, family breakdown and single parenthood did not mean that
juvenile delinquency would inevitably follow: grandparents, friends
and neighbours can in some circumstances help lone mothers to cope
quite well. But all the evidence — statistical and anecdotal — pointed
to the breakdown of families as the starting point for a range of social
ills of which getting into trouble with the police was only one. Boys
who lack the guidance of a father are more likely to suffer social
problems of all kinds. Single parents are more likely to live in relative
poverty and poorer housing. Children can be traumatized by divorce
far more than their parents realize. Children from unstable family
backgrounds are more likely to have learning difficulties. They are at
greater risk of abuse in the home from men who are not the real
father. They are also more likely to run away to our cities and join the
ranks of the young homeless where, in turn, they fall prey to all kinds
of evil.
The most important — and most difficult — aspect of what needed
to be done was to reduce the positive incentives to irresponsible
conduct. Young girls were tempted to become pregnant because that
brought them a council flat and an income from the state. My advisers
and I were considering whether there was some way of providing less
attractive — but correspondingly more secure and supervised —
housing for these young people. I had seen some excellent hostels of
this sort run by the churches. Similarly, young people who ran away
from home to sleep on the streets needed help. But I firmly resisted the
argument that poverty was the basic cause — rather than the result —
of their plight and felt that it was the voluntary bodies which could
provide not just hostel places (which were often in surplus) but
guidance and friendship of the sort the state never could. *
We were feeling our way towards a new ethos for welfare policy:
one comprising the discouragement of state dependency and the
encouragement of self-reliance; greater use of voluntary bodies
including religious and charitable organizations like the Salvation
Army; and, most controversially, built-in incentives towards decent
and responsible behaviour. We might then reduce the problem over
the next generation rather than increase it, as the last generation had
done. But our attempts to rethink welfare along these lines met a
number of objections. Some were strictly practical and we had to
respect them. Others, though, were rooted in the attitude that it was

not for the state to make moral distinctions in its social policy. Indeed,
when I raised such points I was sometimes amused to detect illconcealed expressions of disapproval on the faces of civil servants
under the veneer of official politeness.
In spite of all the difficulties, by the time I left office my advisers
and I were assembling a package of measures to strengthen the
traditional family whose disintegration was the common source of so
much suffering. We had not the slightest illusion that the effects of
what could be done would be more than marginal. Nor, in a sense,
would I have wanted them to be. For while the stability of the family
is a condition for social order and economic progress the
independence of the family is also a powerful check on the authority
of the state. There are limits beyond which ‘family policy’ should not
seek to go.
That is why I considered it important to encourage voluntary bodies
which had the right values and vision, like Mrs Margaret Harrison’s
‘Homestart’, whose six thousand voluntary workers were themselves
parents and offered friendship, common sense advice and support in
the family home. I preferred if at all possible that direct help should
come from someone other than professional social workers. Of course,
professionals have a vital role in the most difficult cases — for
example, where access to the home has to be gained to prevent
tragedy. In recent years, however, some social workers have
exaggerated their expertise and magnified their role, in effect
substituting themselves for the parents with insufficient cause.
I was also appalled by the way in which men fathered a child and
then absconded, leaving the single mother — and the taxpayer — to
foot the bill for their irresponsibility and condemning the child to a
lower standard of living. I thought it scandalous that only one in three
children entitled to receive maintenance actually benefited from
regular payments. So — against considerable opposition from Tony
Newton, the Social Security Secretary, and from the Lord Chancellor’s
department — I insisted that a new Child Support Agency be set up,
and that maintenance be based not just on the cost of bringing up a
child but on that child’s right to share in its parents’ rising living
standards. This was the background to the Child Support Act, 1991.
As for divorce itself, I did not accept that we should follow the Law
Commission’s recommendation in November 1990 that this should just
become a ‘process’ in which ‘fault’ was not at issue. In some cases —
for example where there is violence — I considered that divorce was
not just permissible but unavoidable. Yet I also felt strongly that if all
the remaining culpability was removed from marital desertion, divorce
would be that much more common.
The question of how best — through the tax and social security
system — to support families with children was a vexed one to which I
and my advisers were giving much thought when I left office. There
was great pressure, which I had to fight hard to resist, to provide tax

reliefs or subsidies for child care. This would, of course, have swung
the emphasis further towards discouraging mothers from staying at
home. I believed that it was possible — as I had — to bring up a
family while working, as long as one was willing to make a great effort
to organize one’s time properly and with some extra help. But I did not
believe that it was fair to those mothers who chose to stay at home
and bring up their families on the one income to give tax reliefs to
those who went out to work and had two incomes.* It always seemed
odd to me that the feminists — so keenly sensitive to being patronized
by men but without any such sensitivity to the patronage of the state
— could not grasp that.
More generally, there was the question of how to treat children
within the tax and benefit system. At one extreme were those
‘libertarians’ who believed that children no more merited recognition
within the tax and benefit systems than a consumer durable. At the
other were those who would have liked a fully fledged ‘natalist policy’
to increase the birth rate. I rejected both views. But I accepted the
long-standing idea that the tax someone paid on his income should
take into account his family responsibilities. This starting point was
important in deciding what to do about child benefit. This sum was
paid — tax free — to many families whose incomes were such that
they did not really need it and was very expensive. But, as I reminded
the Treasury on a number of occasions, it had been introduced partly
as an equivalent of the (now abolished) child tax allowances, so there
was an argument on grounds of fairness that its real value should be
sustained. As a compromise we eventually decided in the autumn of
1990 that it should be uprated for the first child but not the others:
but this did not settle the larger question of what the future of child
support should be. I would have liked to return to a system including
child tax allowances, which I believed would have been fairer, clearer
and — incidentally — extremely popular. But the fiscal purists in the
Treasury were still fighting a strong action against me on this at the
time I left Downing Street.
All that family policy can do is to create a framework in which
families are encouraged to stay together and provide properly for their
children. The wider influences of the media, schools and above all the
churches are more powerful than anything government can do. But so
much hung on what happened to the structure of the nation’s families
that only the most myopic libertarian would regard it as outside the
purview of the state: for my part, I felt that over the years the state
had done so much harm that the opportunity to do some remedial
work was not to be missed.
THE ARTS
Perhaps nowhere were the proper limits of what the state should do
more hotly disputed than in the world of the arts. The proponents of

subsidies would stress that the state today was only performing the
role of generous private patrons of the past, that access to artistic
treasures must not depend on personal wealth and — more practically
— that every other country subsidized the arts and therefore we must
too. Against that — and this was significantly the view of Nick Ridley,
the only member of the Government who could really paint — it could
be argued that no artist had a right to a living from his work and that
the market should be left to operate as with any other activity. My
own attitude was somewhat different from either of these. I was not
convinced that the state should play Maecenas. Artistic talent — let
alone artistic genius — is unplanned, unpredictable, eccentrically
individual. Regimented, subsidized, owned and determined by the
state, it withers. Moreover the ‘state’ in these cases comes to mean the
vested interests of the arts lobby. I wanted to see the private sector
raising more money and bringing business acumen and efficiency to
bear on the administration of cultural institutions. I wanted to
encourage private individuals to give by covenant, not the state to
take through taxes. But I was profoundly conscious of how a country’s
art collections, museums, libraries, operas and orchestras combine
with its architecture and monuments to magnify its international
standing. It is not just or even mainly a question of revenues from
tourism: the public manifestation of a nation’s culture is as much a
demonstration of its qualities as the size of its GDP is of its energies.
Consequently, it mattered to me that culturally as well as
economically Britain should be able to hold its head up in comparison
with the United States and Europe. And indeed we did. London is one
of the world’s great centres of culture. We have, in the West End, the
most vibrant commercial theatre in the world. We have probably the
widest variety of museums of any city, ranging from the intimate and
yet magnificent Wallace Collection to the glories of the British
Museum. The performing arts, whether theatre, music or opera are
represented in astonishing diversity.
But there is always more to be done — if it can be afforded. I
certainly did not regret — though from the chorus of complaints about
‘cuts’ you would not have known it — that central government
spending on the arts rose sharply in real terms while I was in Downing
Street. Greater stability was provided too: from 1988 the Arts Council
budget was set for a three-year period. Government funds were,
wherever possible, used to attract private sponsorship for developing
existing museums and galleries. For example, in March 1990 we
announced the establishment of a new Museums and Galleries
Improvement Fund — a joint initiative with the Wolfson Foundation.
A succession of budgets included provisions to encourage covenanted
giving. The most potentially significant of these was the introduction
in October 1990 of a new tax relief for one-off gifts to charities from
individuals and companies.

My greatest disappointment was my inability to secure for Britain
the magnificent Thyssen Collection. In February 1988 my old friend
Sir Peter Smithers wrote to me from Switzerland to tell me that his
neighbour, Baron ‘Heinie’ Thyssen-Bornemisza, was keen to have his
collection of Old and Modern Masters come permanently to Britain.
Fifty of the Thyssen Collection pictures were on show at the Royal
Academy and I had been to see them like so many others — and they
were just fabulous. I asked for a report on the full Thyssen Collection
and learned that it contained some supreme masterpieces including a
Van Eyck Annunciation, Dürer’s Christ Among the Doctors and Holbein’s
Henry VIII, as well as paintings by Carpaccio, Caravaggio, Cézanne,
Degas and Van Gogh. I was determined to do all that we could to
secure it for Britain. I had been to Portugal in 1984 where I had seen
the Gulbenkian Collection which had been offered to Britain in the
1930s but, sadly, was let slip.
The project would have been very costly. We thought that it would
require at least £200 million to satisfy the Baron’s requirements: but
for this we would receive a collection valued at Sotheby’s at $1.2
billion. The cost would have had to be met by a combination of public
and private funding to go towards the building in which the collection
would be housed. It would have caused an outcry from some of the
British arts lobby, who understandably thought that such sums would
be better spent on them and their favoured projects. But it was worth
it.
Nick Ridley and I took charge of the negotiations. Cabinet agreed
the allocation of money. The international legal problems were all
ironed out. Within a matter of six weeks the formal offer was taken
personally by Robin Butler (the Cabinet Secretary) to Baron Thyssen in
Switzerland. Alas, the real problem — insuperable as it turned out —
was that it was not clear who precisely had the final say about the
disposition of the collection. Nor was it clear what the status was of a
loan agreement reached with the Spanish Government to the effect
that the collection would go there for a period of years. In the end, it
did indeed go to Spain on loan. But I had no regrets about having
made the attempt to win it for Britain. It was not only a great treasure
but a good investment — in every sense.
BROADCASTING
The world of the media had in common with that of the arts a highly
developed sense of its own importance to the life of the nation. But
whereas the arts lobby was constantly urging government to do more,
the broadcasters were pressing us to do less. Broadcasting was one of a
number of areas — the professions such as teaching, medicine and the
law were others — in which special pleading by powerful interest
groups was disguised as high-minded commitment to some greater
good. So anyone who queried, as I did, whether a licence fee — with

non-payment subject to criminal sanctions — was the best way to pay
for the BBC, was likely to be pilloried as at best philistine and at worst
undermining its ‘constitutional independence’. Criticism of the
broadcasters’ decisions to show material which outraged the sense of
public decency or played into the hands of terrorists and criminals was
always likely to be met with accusations of censorship. Attempts to
break the powerful duopoly which the BBC and ITV had achieved —
which encouraged restrictive practices, increased costs and kept out
talent — were decried as threatening the ‘quality of broadcasting’.
Some of Britain’s television and radio was of very high quality indeed,
particularly drama and news. Internationally, it was in a class of its
own. But the idea that a small clique of broadcasting professionals
always knew what was best and that they should be more or less
immune from criticism or competition was not one I could accept.
Unfortunately, in the Home Office the broadcasters often found a
ready advocate. The irony that a Reithian rhetoric should be used to
defend a moral neutrality between terrorism and the forces of law and
order, as well as programmes that seemed to many to be scurrilous
and offensive, was quite lost.
The notion of ‘public service broadcasting’ was the kernel of what
the broadcasting oligopolists claimed to be defending. Unfortunately,
when subject to closer inspection that kernel began rapidly to
disintegrate. ‘Public service broadcasting’ was extremely difficult to
define. One element was supposed to be that viewers or listeners in all
parts of the country who paid the same licence fee should be able to
receive all public service channels — what was described as the
concept of ‘universality’. More important, though, was the idea that
there should be a proper balance of information, education and
entertainment offered through a wide range of high quality
programmes. More recently, the public service obligation had been
extended to cover particular ‘minority’ programmes. The BBC and the
IBA — which regulated the independent television companies —
mainly gave effect to this public service obligation by their influence
over scheduling.
So much for the — somewhat nebulous and increasingly outdated —
theory. The practice was very different. BBC1 and ITV ran programmes
that were increasingly
indistinguishable
from commercial
programming in market systems — soap operas, sport, game shows
and made-for-TV films. To use Benthamite language, the public
broadcasters were claiming the rights of poetry but providing us with
pushpin. Good fun perhaps. But did our civilization really depend on
it?
Furthermore the duopoly was being undermined by technological
developments. Scarcity of available spectrum had previously
determined that only a very few channels could be broadcast. But this
was changing. It seemed likely that ever higher-frequency parts of the
spectrum would be able to be brought into use. Cable television and

direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS) also looked likely to transform
the possibilities. There was more opportunity for payment — per
channel or per programme — by subscription. An entire new world
was opening up.
I believed we should take advantage of these technical possibilities
to give viewers a far wider choice. This was already happening in
countries as diverse as the United States and Luxemburg. Why not in
Britain? But this vastly increased potential demand for programmes
should not be met from within the existing duopoly. I wanted to see
the widest competition among and opportunities for the independent
producers — who were themselves virtually a creation of our earlier
decision to set up Channel 4 in 1982. I also believed that it would be
possible to combine more choice for viewers and more opportunity for
producers with standards — both of production and of taste — that
were as high as, if not higher than, those under the existing duopoly.
To make assurance doubly sure, however, I wanted to establish
independent watchdogs to keep standards high by exposing
broadcasters to public criticism, complaint and debate.
The Peacock Committee on Broadcasting, which had been set up by
Leon Brittan as Home Secretary in March 1985 and reported the
following year, provided a good opportunity to look at all these
matters once again. I would have liked to find an alternative to the
BBC licence fee. One possibility was advertising: Peacock rejected the
idea. Willie Whitelaw too was fiercely opposed to it and indeed
threatened to resign from the Government if it were introduced. I felt
that index-linking the licence fee achieved something of the same
purpose — to make the BBC more cost-conscious and business-like. In
October 1986 the ministerial committee on broadcasting which I
chaired agreed that the BBC licence fee should remain at £58 until
April 1988 and then be linked to the RPI until 1991. But I did not drop
my long-term reservations about the licence fee as the source of its
funding. It was agreed to study whether the licence fee could be
replaced by subscription.
At least as important for the future was the need to break the BBC
and ITV duopoly over the production of the programmes they showed.
My ministerial group agreed that the Government should set a target
of 25 per cent of BBC and ITV programmes to be provided by
independent producers. But there was a sharp division between those
of us like Nigel Lawson and David Young who believed that the BBC
and ITV would use every opportunity to resist this and Douglas Hurd
and Willie Whitelaw who thought that they could be persuaded
without legislation. Douglas was to enter into discussions with the
broadcasters and report back. In the end we had to legislate to secure
it.
I also insisted, against Home Office resistance, that our 1987 general
election manifesto should contain a firm commitment to ‘bring
forward proposals for stronger and more effective arrangements to

reflect [public] concern [about] the display of sex and violence on
television’. This produced the Broadcasting Standards Council of
which William Rees-Mogg became the very effective chairman and
which was put on a statutory basis in the 1989 Broadcasting Act.
After the election there was more time to think about the long-term
future of broadcasting. Apart from the opportunities for more channels
which technology offered and the continuing discussion about how to
achieve the 25 per cent target for independent producers, we needed
to consider the future of Channel 4 — which I would have liked to
privatize altogether, though Douglas Hurd disagreed — and the still
more important matter of how the existing system of allocating ITV
franchises should be changed. The Peacock Committee recommended
that the system be changed to become more ‘transparent’ and I
strongly agreed with this objective. Under the Peacock proposals, if
the IBA decided to award a franchise to a contractor other than the
highest bidder it should be required to make a full, public and detailed
statement of its reasons. This had the merit of openness and simplicity
as well as maximizing revenues for the Treasury. But we immediately
ran into the morass of arguments about ‘quality’.
In September 1987 I held a seminar to which the main figures in
broadcasting were invited to discuss the future. There was more
agreement than I might have thought possible on the technical
opportunities and the need for greater choice and competition. But
some of those present took a dim view of our decision to set up a
Broadcasting Standards Council and to remove the exemption enjoyed
by the broadcasters from the provisions of the Obscene Publications
Act. I was entirely unrepentant. I said that they must remember that
television was special because it was watched in the family’s sittingroom. Standards on television had an effect on society as a whole and
were therefore a matter of proper public interest for the Government.
We had a number of discussions during 1988 about the contents of
the planned white paper on broadcasting. (It was eventually published
in November.) I was pressing for the phasing out of the BBC licence
fee altogether to be announced in that document. But Douglas was
against this and a powerful lobby on behalf of the BBC built up. In the
end I agreed to drop my insistence on it and on the privatization of
Channel 4. But I made more progress in ensuring that Channel 3
should be subject to much less heavy regulation under the new ITC
(Independent Television Commission) than under the IBA.
Of course, one could only do so much by changing the framework of
the system: as always, it was the people who operated within it who
were the key. The appointment of Duke Hussey as Chairman of the
BBC in 1986 and later of John Birt as Deputy Director-General
represented an improvement in every respect. When I met Duke
Hussey and Joel Barnett — his deputy — in September 1988 I told
them how much I supported the new approach being taken. But I also
did not disguise my anger at the BBC’s continued ambivalence as

regards the reporting of terrorism and violence. I said that the BBC
had a duty to uphold the great institutions and liberties of the country
from which we all benefited.
The broadcasters continued to lobby fiercely against the proposals in
the Broadcasting White Paper on the process of auctioning the ITV
franchises. My preferred approach was that every applicant would
have to pass a ‘quality threshold’ and then go on to offer a financial
bid, with the ITC being obliged to select the highest. Otherwise a
gathering of the great and the good could make an essentially
arbitrary choice with clear possibilities of favouritism, injustice and
propping up the status quo. But the Home Office team argued that we
had to make concessions — first in June 1989 in response to
consultation on the white paper and then at report stage of the
broadcasting bill in the spring of 1990, when they said there would be
great parliamentary difficulties otherwise. These unfortunately
muddied the transparency which I had hoped to achieve and produced
a compromise which turned out to be less than satisfactory when the
ITC bestowed the franchises the following year ‘in the old-fashioned
way’. Still, the new auctioning system — combined with the 25 per
cent target for independent producers, the arrival of new satellite
channels, and a successful assault on union restrictive practices —
went some way towards weakening the monopolistic grip of the
broadcasting establishment. They did not break it.
SCIENCE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
In 1988 and 1989 there was a great burst of public interest in the
environment. Unfortunately, under the green environmental umbrella
sheltered a number of only slightly connected issues. At the lowest but
not by any means least important level, there was concern for the local
environment, which I too always felt strongly about. Indeed, every
time I came back from some spotlessly maintained foreign city my
staff and the then Secretary of State for the Environment knew that
they could expect a stiff lecture on the litter-strewn streets of parts of
London. But this was essentially and necessarily a matter for the local
community, though the privatizing of badly run municipal cleaning
services often helped.
Then there was the concern about planning — or rather the alleged
lack of it — and overdevelopment of the countryside. Here there was,
as Nick Ridley became somewhat unpopular for robustly pointing out,
a straightforward choice. If people were to be able to afford houses
there must be sufficient amounts of building land available. Tighter
planning meant less development land and fewer opportunities for
home ownership.
There was also widespread public concern — some merited but
much not — about the standard of Britain’s drinking water, rivers and
sea. The European Commission found this a fruitful area into which to

extend its ‘competence’ whenever possible. In fact, a hugely expensive
and highly successful programme was under way to clean up our
rivers and the results were already evident — for example the return
of healthy and abundant fish to the Thames, Tyne, Wear and Tees.
I always drew a clear distinction between these ‘environmental’
concerns and the quite separate question of atmospheric pollution. For
me, the proper starting point in formulating policy towards this latter
problem was science. There had always to be a sound scientific base
on which to build — and of course a clear estimation of the cost in
terms of public expenditure and economic growth foregone — if one
was not going to be thrust into the kind of ‘green socialism’ which the
Left were eager to promote. But the closer I examined what was
happening to Britain’s scientific effort, the less happy I was about it.
There were two problems. First, too high a proportion of
government funding for science was directed towards the Defence
budget. Second — and reflecting the same approach — too much
emphasis was being given to the development of products for the
market rather than to pure science. Government was funding research
which could and should have been left to industry and, as a result,
there was a tendency for the research effort in the universities and in
scientific institutes to lose out. I was convinced that this was wrong.
As someone with a scientific background, I knew that the greatest
economic benefits of scientific research had always resulted from
advances in fundamental knowledge rather than the search for specific
applications. For example, transistors were not discovered by the
entertainment industry seeking new ways of marketing pop music but
rather by people working on wave mechanics and solid-state physics.
In the summer of 1987 I instituted a new approach to government
funding of science. I set up ‘E’(ST) as a new sub-committee of the
Economic Committee of the Cabinet which I now chaired. This
replaced ‘E’(RD) that had been chaired by Paul Channon as Industry
Secretary. I also set up a Cabinet committee of officials and experts —
ACOST — to replace ACARD which had been shadowing Paul
Channon’s committee. ‘E’(ST) and ACOST examined departmental
science budgets, breaking them down between basic science and
support for innovation, giving greater emphasis to the first. My ideal
was to search out the brightest and best scientists and back them
rather than try to provide support for work in particular sectors. What
those who have no real understanding of science are inclined to
overlook is that in science — just as in the arts — the greatest
achievements cannot be planned and predicted: they result from the
unique creativity of a particular mind.
At every stage scientific discovery and knowledge set the
requirements and the limits for the approach we should pursue
towards the problems of the global environment. It was, for example,
the British Antarctic Survey which discovered a large hole in the ozone
layer which protects life from ultra-violet radiation. Similarly, it was

scientific research which proved that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were
responsible for ozone depletion. Convinced by this evidence,
governments agreed first to cut and then to phase out the use of CFCs
— for example in refrigerators, aerosols and air conditioning systems.
From the time of the first international meeting and agreement in
Montreal in 1987 until my last days in office when I was addressing
the Second World Climate Conference in Geneva on the subject, I took
the closest personal interest as the scientific evidence was amassed and
analysed.
‘Global warming’ was another atmospheric threat which required
the application of hard-headed scientific principles. The relationship
between the industrial emission of carbon dioxide — the most
significant though not the only ‘greenhouse gas’ — and climatic
change was a good deal less certain than the relationship between
CFCs and ozone depletion. Nuclear power production did not produce
carbon dioxide — nor did it produce the gases which led to acid rain.
It was a far cleaner source of power than coal. However, this did not
attract the environmental lobby towards it: instead, they used the
concern about global warming to attack capitalism, growth and
industry. I sought to employ the authority which I had gained in the
whole environmental debate, mainly as a result of my speech to the
Royal Society in September 1988, to ensure a sense of proportion.
That speech was the fruit of much thought and a great deal of work.
It was our outgoing ambassador at the UN, Sir Crispin Tickell, who
first suggested that I should make a major speech on the subject. I
decided that the Royal Society was the perfect forum. George Guise,
who advised me on science in the Policy Unit, and I spent two
weekends working on the draft. It broke quite new political ground.
But it is an extraordinary commentary on the lack of media interest in
the subject that, contrary to my expectations, the television did not
even bother to send film crews to cover the occasion. In fact, I had
been relying on the television lights to enable me to read my script in
the gloom of the Fishmongers’ Hall, where it was to be delivered; in
the event, candelabra had to be passed up along the table to allow me
to do so. The speech itself triggered much debate and discussion,
particularly one passage:
For generations, we have assumed that the efforts of mankind would leave
the fundamental equilibrium of the world’s systems and atmosphere stable.
But it is possible that with all these enormous changes (population,
agricultural, use of fossil fuels) concentrated into such a short period of time,
we have unwittingly begun a massive experiment with the system of this
planet itself… In studying the system of the earth and its atmosphere we
have no laboratory in which to carry out controlled experiments. We have to
rely on observations of natural systems. We need to identify particular areas
of research which will help to establish cause and effect. We need to consider
in more detail the likely effects of change within precise timescales. And to
consider the wider implications for policy — for energy production, for fuel
efficiency, for reforestation… We must ensure that what we do is founded on
good science to establish cause and effect.

The relationship between scientific research and policy towards the
global environment was not just a technical matter. It went to the
heart of what differentiated my approach from that of the socialists.
For me, the economic progress, scientific advance and public debate
which occur in free societies themselves offered the means to overcome
threats to individual and collective wellbeing. For the socialist, each
new discovery revealed a ‘problem’ for which the repression of human
activity by the state was the only ‘solution’ and state-planned
production targets must always take precedence. The scarred
landscape, dying forests, poisoned rivers and sick children of the
former communist states bear tragic testimony to which system
worked better, both for people and the environment.
*

For more discussion of ‘homelessness’ see pp. 603–4.

I was, though, content to make one minor adjustment. This was to provide tax relief
for workplace nurseries.
*

CHAPTER XXII

A Little Local Difficulty
The replacement of the rating system with the community charge

The introduction of the community charge to replace the domestic
rates turned out to be by far the most controversial of the changes
promised in our 1987 general election manifesto. Whereas the other
elements of those reforms — in education, housing and trade union
law — took root, the community charge has since been abolished by a
government consisting largely of those who framed and implemented
it.
The charge became a rallying point for those who opposed me, both
within the Conservative Party and on the far left. Had I not been
facing problems on other fronts — above all, had the Cabinet and
Party held their nerve — I could have ridden through the difficulties.
Indeed, the community charge, having been modified in several ways,
was beginning to work at the very time it was abandoned. Given time,
it would have been seen as one of the most far-reaching and beneficial
reforms ever made in the working of local government. Above all, the
community charge offered a last chance of responsible, efficient, local
democracy in Britain. Its abandonment will mean that more and more
powers will pass to central government, that upward pressures on
public spending and taxation will increase accordingly, and that still
fewer people of ability will become local councillors.
PROBLEMS WITH THE OLD SYSTEM
We did not enter lightly upon the path of radical reform of local
government finance. I shared much of the traditional Tory caution
about turning existing financial or administrative systems upside
down. If it had been possible to carry on as before I would have been
quite prepared to do so. But by almost universal agreement it was not.
The person who knew this best was Michael Heseltine — in fact, as it
turned out, the most vocal Conservative opponent of the community
charge. Michael, as Environment Secretary in the early 1980s, had
tried to make the old system work by resorting to more and more
complicated devices. He took a whole battery of new powers in an
attempt to deal with the problem: that we lacked the means to control
local government spending, though it made up a large fraction of
overall public expenditure. He brought in the block grant system and
‘grant-related expenditure assessments’ (GREAs), ‘targets’ and
‘holdback’, limits on local authority capital expenditure, and the Audit
Commission, as well as beginning a general squeeze on the central

government grant — all designed to hold down local spending and to
give ratepayers an incentive to think twice before re-electing highspending councils.*
The system became so complicated that scarcely anyone understood
it. It was like the ‘Schleswig-Holstein question’ of the last century:
Palmerston joked once that only three people ever had a real grasp of
it — one of them was dead, one was mad and he himself had forgotten
it. The system was also highly unpopular, wayward in its application
and inexplicably unfair to historically low-spending authorities, many
of whom were set targets below their GREAs. Worse still, it did not
work. Ministers might exhort, bewail and threaten but local
government spending grew inexorably in real terms, year after year.

So in 1981 Michael came up with new ideas. He proposed that if
local authorities spent more than a certain amount over and above
their GREAs all the extra would have to be paid for by domestic
ratepayers. The Government also agreed that a local referendum
should be held before a council could go ahead with the extra
spending. This proposal had something new and important to be said
for it because it at least marginally reinforced local accountability
which — as I shall explain — was at the root of the problem. But, in
spite or even because of that, it drew howls of protest from local
authorities and the Tory back-benchers whom they so easily
influenced. The proposal had to be withdrawn.
So Michael’s successors at the Department of the Environment —
Tom King and then Patrick Jenkin — were left with no alternative but
to apply more and more complex central controls, while the local
authorities went on spending. In 1984 we took powers to limit directly
the rates of selected local authorities, with powers in reserve to limit
them all. This procedure — known as ‘rate-capping’ — was one of the
most effective weapons at our disposal. Much of the overspending was
concentrated in a small number of authorities, so that capping fewer
than twenty could make a considerable difference. It allowed us to
offer some protection from very high rates to businesses and families
who were trying to make their own way in profligate Labour
authorities — particularly those families on incomes just above the
benefit levels, who could not rely on the state to pay their rising rates
bills. But rate-capping was a complicated business: it stretched the
capacity of the Department of the Environment and could be
challenged in the courts. The fundamental problem remained.
I had always disliked the rates intensely. Any property tax is
essentially a tax on improving one’s own home. It was manifestly
unfair and un-Conservative. In my constituency and in letters received
from people all over the country I witnessed a chorus of complaints
from people living alone — widows for example — who consumed far
less of local authority services than the large family next door with
several working sons, but who were expected to pay the same rates
bills, regardless of their income. I had, of course, been Shadow

Environment spokesman at the time of the October 1974 election
when we promised to abolish the rates altogether. In fact, this was a
last-minute pledge insisted upon by Ted Heath about which I had
considerable doubts for we had not properly thought through what to
put in their place: but I had witnessed the anger and distress caused by
the 1973 rate revaluation and believed strongly that something new
must replace the existing discredited system.* When I became Prime
Minister I stopped any further rate revaluations in England. (In
Scotland the system was different and a domestic rate revaluation was
required by law every five years, though extensions were possible and
we took powers to put off for two years a revaluation due in 1983.)
But the counterpart of this decision was that the potential disruption
which a rate revaluation would have caused in England grew by the
year. And we could not put it off for ever.
The reliance on property taxes as a principal source of income for
local government went back centuries. Rates made sense, perhaps,
when the bulk of local authority services were supplied to property —
roads, water and drains, and so on — but in the course of the present
century local authorities have increasingly become providers of
services for people, such as education, libraries and personal social
services.
Moreover, the franchise for local elections has been widened
dramatically. Originally, it was limited to property holders: now it is
almost identical to that for parliamentary elections. The old business
vote has gone too. The only serious argument for the rates — business
and domestic — was that they were relatively easy to collect: people
can abscond, houses and factories cannot. The rates became a painless
tax for the large number of local electors who were not liable to pay
them. But this was what made the old system so defective, ultimately
even dangerous. Of the 35 million local electors in England, 17 million
were not themselves liable for rates, and of the 18 million liable, 3
million paid less than full rates and 3 million paid nothing at all.
Though some of those not liable contributed to the rates paid by
others (for example, spouses and working children living at home),
many people had no direct reason to be concerned about their
council’s overspending, because somebody else picked up all or most
of the bill. Worse still, people lacked the information they needed to
hold their local authority to account: the whole system of local
government finance worked to obscure the performance of individual
authorities. It is not surprising that many councillors felt free to pursue
policies which no properly operating democratic discipline would have
permitted.
This lack of accountability lay behind the continued overspending.
Although central government steadily reduced the share of local
government spending met from the Exchequer, the result was more
likely to be higher rates than lower total public spending. That was
unsatisfactory for the overall economy. But it was ruinous for local

businesses and — ultimately — for local communities. In the summer
of 1985 when we began seriously to look at the alternatives to the
rating system, some 60 per cent of the rate income of local authorities
in England was coming from business rates. In some areas, though, it
was a far higher percentage. For example, in the Labour-controlled
London borough of Camden it reached 75 per cent. Socialist councils
were thus able to squeeze local businesses dry and the latter had no
recourse except to press central government to cap the council
concerned or to move out of the area. It might be imagined that the
devastating effect of such policies of overspending on employment
would discourage Labour authorities from such action. But I never
forgot that the unspoken objective of socialism — municipal or
national — was to increase dependency. Poverty was not just the
breeding ground of socialism: it was the deliberately engineered effect
of it.
Popular discontent with the rates surfaced strongly in the motions
submitted by constituencies for our 1984 Party Conference.
Conservatives in local government were unhappy at the apparatus of
central controls — particularly on capital spending — and within the
Department of the Environment there was concern that these controls
gave rise to so many anomalies and political difficulties that they
could not be sustained for many more years. Nor was it yet clear how
effective rate-capping would prove. Accordingly, in September 1984
Patrick Jenkin sought my agreement to announce to the Party
Conference a major review of local government finance. The Party
Chairman, John Gummer, gave him strong support. But I was cautious.
There was a danger of raising expectations that we could not meet.
After all, there had been two previous reviews — under Michael
Heseltine and Tom King — and only the most modest of mice had
emerged. Unlike October 1974, we must be absolutely clear that we
had a workable alternative to put in place of the present system. I
authorized Patrick to say no more than that we would undertake
studies of the most serious inequities and deficiencies of the present
system. There would be no publicly announced ‘review’ and no hint
that we might go as far as abolishing the rates.
Later that October I held a small meeting at Chequers to listen to a
presentation of the intricacies of the Rate Support Grant system. When
it ended I was more convinced than ever of the fundamental
absurdities of the present system. Afterwards I discussed the proposed
studies with the Junior Local Government minister, William
Waldegrave, and suggested that Lord Rothschild — the former head of
the CPRS in Ted Heath’s time and someone for whom I had the highest
regard, having worked with him on science policy when I was
Education Secretary — should be brought into it. William had also
worked with him at the CPRS and jumped at the idea. Much of the
radical thinking which resulted was Victor Rothschild’s.

By the time that the studies were complete, the political imperative
for change had been dramatically demonstrated by a disastrous rate
revaluation in Scotland. In Scotland there was a legislative
requirement for rate revaluation every five years, though if George
Younger and Michael Ancram at the Scottish Office had alerted us to
the full consequences in time we could have introduced an order to
stop it or mitigated its effects by making changes to the distribution of
central government grant. The Scottish Conservative Party Chairman,
Jim Goold, came to see me in the middle of February 1985 to describe
the fury which had broken out north of the border when the new
rateable values became known. The revaluation had led to a large shift
in the burden from industry to domestic ratepayers and — with the
high level of spending of Scottish local authorities — this was
combined with large overall increases in the poundage. By the time
that I chaired a proper ministerial discussion on the evening of
Thursday 28 February to see what could be done about the problem it
was really too late. Scottish ministers, businessmen and Tory
supporters began with one voice to call for an immediate end to the
rating system.
For us, south of the border, it was powerful evidence of what would
happen if we ever had a rate revaluation in England. There was no
legal obligation to undertake a revaluation in England by a particular
year, but it could fairly be argued that without any revaluation the
rates would contain more and more anomalies. As noted above, the
whole basis of rating valuation by reference to rental values was
dubious anyway. Of course, we could have used capital values for
revaluation. But capital values can go down as well as up, so a system
based on them would have been highly disruptive, unpopular and a
very uncertain basis for local government finance. This was the option
which Nigel Lawson and — from time to time depending on which
spokesman was asked — the Labour Party favoured. But I was firmly
against it, because it was still a tax on the value of someone’s home
and the improvements made to it.
ORIGINS OF THE COMMUNITY CHARGE
So it was that when Ken Baker, then DoE minister responsible for local
government, his junior, William Waldegrave, and Lord Rothschild
made their presentation to a seminar I held at Chequers at the end of
March 1985 I was very open to new ideas. It was at the Chequers
meeting that the community charge was born. They convinced me that
we should abolish domestic rates and replace them with a community
charge levied at a flat rate on all resident adults. There would be
rebates for those on low incomes — though rebates should be less than
100 per cent so that everyone should contribute something, and
therefore have something to lose from electing a spendthrift council.
This principle of accountability underlay the whole reform.

The second element of the approach was that business rates would
be charged at a single nationally set level and the revenue
redistributed to all authorities on a per capita basis. The reform of
business rates would also make it possible to end one of the most
unsatisfactory features of the old system: ‘resource equalization’. One
problem with the rating system was that taxable capacity varied
enormously from one authority to another, since the value and amount
of property itself varied — particularly commercial and business
property. ‘Resource equalization’ was the name given to the process by
which central government redistributed income between authorities to
even out the effect. As a result there were major variations across the
country in the amount of rates paid on similar properties for a given
standard of service, generally to the disadvantage of the South, where
properties were usually valued much more highly. A great deal of
money was involved, though like much else in local government
finance the average voter had never heard of it. Such a system, of
course, made it still harder for voters to judge whether they were
getting value for money from their authority. But with the abolition of
domestic rates and the distribution of the national business rate on a
per capita basis, taxable capacity would no longer vary between
authorities and so the need for ‘resource equalization’ disappeared.
Obviously some authorities had greater needs than others, but this
would be compensated for by giving them more in central grant. For
the first time it would be possible for every council to provide the
same level of service at the same level of local taxation anywhere in
the country, so that much more transparent comparisons between
councils could be made.
In the discussion which followed there was a lot of tough
questioning but general support for the DoE approach and in
particular a commitment to the strengthening of local accountability.
The only alternative was to go further in the direction of
centralization, for example by having Central government take over
specific local authority functions like education or teachers’ pay, and
yet tighter controls on spending. We wanted to avoid this if we could.
Nor was there any enthusiasm for the two other options which had
long been canvassed — local income tax (LIT) or a local sales tax. The
former would have undermined our efforts to lower income tax at the
national level and would have put in the hands of Labour authorities a
powerful weapon to drive out even more people of talent and energy
from their areas. A sales tax would have been a recipe for absurd
distortions in a country as small as Britain: prices would have varied
from authority to authority, with high spending authorities driving
shoppers to lower-spending neighbours only minutes away. And there
would have had to be massive redistribution of revenue from one area
to another to compensate for variations in the distribution of shops.
Finally, both taxes would have been highly bureaucratic.

Of the ideas now put forward by the DoE team, the only proposal
which I rejected was that we should consider changing the whole of
local government to single-tier authorities. Then and later I was to be
attracted by this on the grounds of the transparency it would have
brought to the community charge figures. But we could not do
everything at once.
After the Chequers seminar William Waldegrave and DoE officials
went away to prepare more detailed proposals. Nigel Lawson had
already expressed reservations through his Chief Secretary Peter Rees
at the seminar. But it was only afterwards that it became clear just
how deeply opposed he was. The DoE proposals were to come before a
Cabinet committee at the end of May. A few days before the meeting
Nigel sent in a Cabinet memorandum strongly challenging the
community charge and urging the consideration of alternatives.
Nigel’s dissenting Cabinet memorandum showed prescience in one
crucial respect: he foresaw that local authorities would use the
introduction of the new tax as an excuse to increase spending,
knowing that they stood a good chance of persuading the voters that
the Government was to blame for higher bills. I too had worries on
this score, and the main aspect of the DoE’s early thinking of which I
was doubtful was their optimistic suggestion that enhanced
accountability would make it possible to abandon ‘capping’ altogether.
In an ideal world perhaps this would have been true. But the world
which years of socialism in our inner cities had created was far from
ideal. I was determined that capping powers would remain and,
indeed, before the end I would find myself pressing for much more
extensive community charge capping than was ever envisaged for the
rates.
When the committee met I asked Nigel to work up his alternative
proposals. If this was to be done it would have to be done quickly: I
had it in mind — if we went ahead — to get a green paper published
by the autumn of 1985, with a view to legislating in the 1986–7
session, which was a tight timetable. But his idea for a ‘Modified
Property Tax’ was not to win any support from colleagues outside the
Treasury when it was circulated in August 1985. It had most of the
defects of the existing system and some more as well.
In September 1985 I promoted Ken Baker from Minister for Local
Government to Secretary of State for the Environment, with
responsibility for refining and then presenting the proposals. During
autumn and winter that year we slogged away in Cabinet committee.
Figures from the DoE made it clear that moving in a single step to a
community charge would create many losers from the change,
particularly (but not only) in the profligate inner London boroughs.
How sharp these changes would be would depend very much on the
level of the charge itself: at this stage — 1985–6 — we were advised
that the average level would be under £200. But I fully realized that
even with these figures there would be real difficulties in transition for

which solutions had to be found.
With the abolition of ‘resource equalization’ and the pooling of
business rates there would be large shifts in the domestic local tax
burden between areas. Areas with high rateable values and low
spending levels would tend to gain. Those with low rateable values
and high spending would tend to lose. London had its own special
problems. Inner London had received specially generous subsidies; a
number of London authorities were very high spenders; there was —
until we eventually abolished it — the burden of high spending by the
Inner London Education Authority; there was also the fact that
business rates, which socialist authorities had in the past been able to
increase more or less at will, would now be limited and pooled, with
the result that extra burdens would fall on domestic ratepayers. In
order to deal with these changes between areas a system called the
‘safety net’ was devised to smooth the transition. The safety net was
designed to be self-financing: it slowed down one area’s losses by
delaying another area’s gains. This was unpopular with the gainers,
but unavoidable unless the Exchequer stepped in to meet the
difference. Nor could the safety net deal directly with the most
politically sensitive question which was the changes in the burden
between individuals and between households.
The problem of limiting individual losses raised the question of
whether the community charge itself should be phased in, and if so,
how. Ken Baker — always canny and cautious — wanted a very long
transition period during which the rates and community charge would
run alongside each other (known in the jargon as ‘dual running’).
Indeed in an early draft of the green paper we were to publish in
January 1986 he wanted to leave open whether the rates would ever
be abolished. I intervened: it had to be clear that the community
charge would replace the rates entirely and not in the very distant
future. The final position which Ken Baker announced to the House of
Commons on Tuesday 28 January 1986 was that the community
charge would start at a low level, with a corresponding cut in the
rates. But the whole burden of any increased spending would fall on
the community charge from the start so that there was a clear link
between higher spending and higher community charges. In
subsequent years there would be further shifts from the rates to the
charge. In some areas the rates would disappear within three years:
they would be eliminated in all areas within ten. The green paper
made it clear that we were retaining capping. On the strong advice of
Scottish ministers, who reminded us continually and forcefully how
much the Scottish people loathed the rates, we also accepted that we
should legislate to bring in the community charge in Scotland in
advance of England and Wales.
THE ABANDONMENT OF DUAL RUNNING

In May 1986 I moved Ken Baker to Education and brought in Nick
Ridley to replace him at the Department of the Environment. Nick
brought a combination of clarity of thought, political courage and
imagination to the questions surrounding the implementation of the
new system. His vision was that local authorities should enable
services to be provided but, unless it was truly necessary, local
authorities should not provide those services themselves. The main
business of modern local government should therefore be regulation —
and not too much of that — rather than owning assets and competing
with private sector businesses. One way of ensuring this was through
the community charge which, by bringing home to people the true
cost of local government, would maximize the pressure for efficiency
and low spending. Complementary to this was the expansion of
competitive tendering of local government services which would result
in more contracting out to the private sector. Nick’s 1988 Local
Government Act required that refuse collection, street cleaning, the
cleaning of buildings, ground maintenance, vehicle maintenance and
repair and catering services (including school meals) be put out to
tender.
It was entirely consistent with this rigorous approach that Nick
considered it illogical to retain capping powers, except perhaps during
the transition to the new system. But I felt we needed this safeguard.
He also wanted to introduce the community charge more quickly than
Ken Baker had envisaged, believing that the sooner local authorities
could be made truly accountable the faster we could go in bringing
local government back onto the right lines. Nick had always opposed
dual running and in the end he persuaded the rest of us to abandon it
— though, as I shall explain, not without a little help from the Party in
the country. The political arguments against dual running were
powerful. Having two local taxes instead of one, even if only for a
time, would have been a gift to our opponents; it would have been
expensive and difficult to administer; and it would have postponed the
very accountability our reforms were about.
During the winter of 1986–7 Parliament legislated to introduce the
community charge in Scotland from April 1989. In February 1987
Malcolm Rifkind won our agreement to drop dual running in Scotland,
though a safety net was retained, and it was on this basis that the
Party north of the border fought the 1987 election. The community
charge was an important issue during the campaign there. Our results
were disappointing but Malcolm Rifkind wrote to me afterwards that
the community charge had been ‘neutral’ in its effect and that it had at
least defused the rates problem. In England and Wales the community
charge was hardly an election issue at all.
Nevertheless, immediately the new Parliament met it became clear
that many of our back-benchers had got the jitters. On 1 July the
whips estimated that while over 150 were clear supporters, there were
nearly 100 ‘doubters’, with 24 outright opponents. There was a real

danger that over the summer recess many of the doubters would
commit themselves against the charge altogether. Nick’s response was
characteristically robust: to propose that we drop dual running,
drastically cut down the safety net and attack the London problem by
direct action to reduce ILEA’s costs. But he met strong opposition from
colleagues, particularly Nigel, and in the end we compromised on dual
running for four years with a full safety net phased out over the same
period.*
It quickly became clear that this had not done the trick. At the Party
Conference in October speaker after speaker attacked dual running
and back-bench opinion was also very strongly opposed to it. All this
made a strong impression on us. We argued it out at a ministerial
meeting on 17 November, and decided that dual running should be
abandoned except for a very few councils, all but one of them in inner
London. We also ended the full safety net, setting a maximum
contribution of £75 per person from the gaining authorities, so that
their gains came through more quickly. (In June 1988 we abandoned
dual running altogether: by that time we had made the decision to
abolish ILEA, which seemed likely to reduce community charge bills in
London significantly in the long term. There were serious doubts too
whether the authorities scheduled for dual running were
administratively competent to do the job).
It is worth noting that the changes we made in local government
finance originated in and continued to reflect opinion in the
Conservative Party, notwithstanding these arguments about
transitional arrangements. Both the English and the Scottish Party
demanded fundamental changes in the rates. It was the Scottish Party
which insisted upon the early introduction of the community charge in
Scotland: and if, as the Scots subsequently claimed, they were guinea
pigs for a great experiment in local government finance they were the
most vociferous and influential guinea pigs which the world has ever
seen.
It is true that in April 1988 we had to fight off an amendment put
forward by Michael Mates MP, a lieutenant of Michael Heseltine,
which would have introduced a ‘banding’ of the community charge —
that is, income would be taken into account in setting the charge. This
would have defeated the whole purpose of the flat-rate charge, as well
as creating damagingly high marginal rates of tax at the level of each
‘band’. The proper way to help the less well off was through
community charge rebates, and Nick Ridley won round many of the
rebels by announcing improvements in these, making them a good
deal more generous than rate rebates had been. But the most
consistent pressure was from Tory MPs anxious to see that the benefits
of the new system came through faster to their constituents.
The bill received its Royal Assent in July 1988. The new system
would come into operation in England and Wales on 1 April 1990.

The discussions about dual running, the safety net and transitional
relief which so preoccupied us in the period before the new system’s
introduction all reflected one fundamental point. The new system of
local authority finance would be ‘transparent’. That is, its clarity and
directness would bring financial realities home to everyone. This, in
my view, was one of its inestimable benefits. As I used to put it in my
speeches explaining the community charge, it provided everyone with
a ‘ready reckoner’. The differing needs of any particular area would be
taken into account in the central government grant. Then a standard
level of community charge would be set and published. If local
authorities chose to spend more than the standard level of service
required then the community charge would go up. The effect would
not be concealed either by complex formulae or by draining more
money from business. Every elector therefore would have the
information and the incentive to insist on efficiency and low levels of
spending.
But the other side of this was that because the total contribution
from businesses was to be held to the rise in the RPI any increase in
local authority spending above the level allowed for in central
government grant would be concentrated on the individual community
charge payer. Each 1 per cent of extra spending would add 4 per cent
to the community charge — the charge covering about a quarter of
total local authority spending. Such high ‘gearing’ meant that if local
authorities pushed up spending — using the opportunity of the
introduction of a new system to do so and then blaming central
government — the increase in the bills to the individual charge payer
would frequently be dramatic. In many badly run (usually Labourcontrolled) authorities families were stunned by the size of the
estimated bills and blamed the Government. In these cases, the deep
unpopularity of the community charge was in a sense proof that it was
likely to work, but the political opposition rapidly began to get out of
hand.
Looking back, it may have been a mistake to do away with the dual
running of rates and community charge. And perhaps we were
relatively too sensitive to the needs of business — as well as too
willing to accept the large transfer of resources from the South to the
North which was entailed by the replacement of the old business
rating system with the new nationally set business rate. Business might
have been expected to pay for at least some of the overspending.
Two other changes would also have helped. First, wasteful as it
might have seemed, there would have been something to be said for
allowing a rating revaluation under the old system to occur in England
before the community charge was introduced. This would have
reminded people how painful it would be to carry on with the rates
and how unfair the rating system was. The gainers under the new
system might have been more appreciative and the losers less
vociferous if they had seen the alternative. Second, I believe that we

should have legislated before the introduction of the charge for much
wider and stronger powers to cap local authority spending. Of course,
there is an apparent contradiction between bringing in a new system
of local authority finance in order to strengthen local accountability
and then taking more powers to the centre. But the contradiction is
apparent rather than real. The beneficial effects of the new system
could not be expected to come through immediately. We should have
been more alert to the cynical abuse of their power which left-wing
authorities would practise, going to any lengths to blame us and the
community charge for their own overspending.
In considering all this we were assisted less than might have been
predicted by what was happening in Scotland. In the first year of the
new system Scottish local authorities pushed up their spending,
increasing their budgets by 14 per cent in 1989–90. But Malcolm
Rifkind, the new Scottish Secretary, argued strongly against capping
these authorities. Because the timetable was very tight and the legal
advice we received was against, I agreed somewhat reluctantly with
this. In the second year of the operation of the community charge in
Scotland, though, there was evidence that the benefits of increased
accountability had begun to restrain local authority spending. So the
indications were mixed.
PREPARING FOR THE INTRODUCTION OF THE CHARGE
It was very important that the first year’s community charge in
England (1990–91) was not so high as to discredit the whole system.
In particular it was crucial that good authorities be able to announce
community charges at or below the level we deemed necessary to
achieve the standard level of service (known as the Community Charge
for Standard Spending, or CCSS). But ensuring this was easier said
than done.
In May 1989 Nick Ridley, Nigel Lawson and John Major (as Chief
Secretary) began discussions on the level of the local authority grant
settlement for 1990–91. There was a wide gap between the DoE and
the Treasury. Each side had good arguments. The figures suggested by
Nick Ridley were, he argued, the only ones which would lead to actual
community charges below £300 (significantly, a far higher figure than
we had envisaged a year before when the community charge
legislation was passed). The Treasury view, with which I agreed, was
that the 1989–90 settlement had been very generous — deliberately so
to pave the way for the community charge. But the only result had
been to lead to greatly increased local authority spending, which was
up 9 per cent in cash terms. Local authorities had kept down the rates
themselves in 1989–90 through the use of reserves, merely deferring
increases. The lesson, the Treasury argued, was that providing more
money from the Exchequer did not mean lower rates (or a lower
community charge). On 25 May I summed up the discussion at a

ministerial meeting by rejecting both Nick Ridley’s and John Major’s
preferred options and going for something in the middle, which I
thought would still give us a tolerable community charge while not
validating the large increase in local authority spending in 1989–90.
But I said that I wanted to see exemplifications of the likely
community charge in each local authority area.
We were not to know it at the time, but these decisions contributed
to the undoing of the community charge. At this time the Treasury was
still using an inflation measure (the GDP deflator) of just 4 per cent. In
fact, inflation and — most important — wage settlements were turning
sharply upwards. Combined with a pretty tight grant settlement and
with the determination of many local authorities to push up spending
for political reasons, we were now on course for much higher levels of
community charge in 1990–91 than any of us foresaw. If we had had
better control over local spending we could have been sure that extra
money from the centre would be used to reduce community charge
bills rather than increase spending.
I moved Chris Patten to become Secretary of State for the
Environment later that summer. By now Conservative back-benchers
were becoming extremely restive. In July they had given Nick Ridley’s
last major statement as Environment Secretary — announcing the
grant settlement — a rough reception. Many of them did not really
understand the new system and the changes that they wanted were
often mutually contradictory. Nick had at least been able to meet one
of their most pressing concerns by announcing a £100 million scheme
to ease the transition in areas with low rateable values, which faced
large increases under the new system. But there was no doubt that the
back-benchers wanted more, and their worries grew during the
autumn. I received regular and depressing reports from the whips.
In early September Chris Patten, with my approval, began a review
of the operation of the charge. A couple of days before, as I was about
to leave for the Prime Minister’s traditional autumn visit to Balmoral,
Ken Baker (now the Party Chairman) had sent me in great secrecy
research conducted by Central Office in ten Conservative marginal
seats. This confirmed the scale of the political problem we faced. On
the assumption of a 7 per cent increase in local spending the following
year, 73 per cent of households and 82 per cent of individuals would
lose from the introduction of the charge in 1990 compared with the
rates in the previous year. If spending increased by 11 per cent the
figures would rise to 79 per cent and 89 per cent respectively. Though
these figures did not take account of extensive rebates, on any
calculation they were pretty bad.
Now that dual running had been dropped, the only way in which we
could limit the losses of individuals or households generally — as
opposed to the losses of areas, which it was the function of the by now
extremely unpopular ‘safety net’ to iron out — was by a new scheme
altogether. Chris Patten and the Treasury accordingly worked up a

proposal for ‘transitional relief’.
Chris favoured a massive programme of transitional relief for
households to limit losses to £2 a week — that is £2 a week on the
basis of what we thought local authorities should spend (the CCSS),
which many of them of course would exceed. Even in this limited form
the scheme might cost as much as £1,500 million. Ken Baker — never
backward when it came to public spending — wanted a very costly
scheme too. The Treasury argued for something much more modest,
targetted on the worst losers. All of this was against a difficult public
expenditure round and a worsening economic situation with rising
inflation. I told Chris Patten that transitional relief on the scale he was
proposing was out of the question, but I also pressed the Treasury hard
to take a positive and co-operative attitude. I held a meeting at the
end of September to try to get agreement. I brought the two sides
closer together and concluded by saying that it was essential that the
scheme should be sufficiently generous to defuse genuine criticism but
that it must be clear that this was indeed the last word and that the
Government would not make further money available for 1990–91.
Discussions continued up to the eve of the Party Conference where
David Hunt, the Local Government minister, announced a scheme
costing £1.2 billion over three years. The scheme would ensure that
former ratepayers (and ratepayer couples) need pay in community
charges no more than £3 a week extra over and above their 1989–90
rate bills, provided that their local authority spent in line with the
Government’s assumptions. Pensioners and disabled people would be
entitled to the same level of help even if they had not previously paid
the rates (and of course many of them were entitled to rebates as
well). At the same time David Hunt announced that the taxpayer
would finance the safety net in England and Wales after the first year
and that all gains would therefore come through in full from 1 April
1991. In spite of this, back-bench pressure increased. There was even
doubt as to whether we could win the crucial Commons votes in
January 1990 to authorize payment of the 1990–91 Revenue Support
Grant. We met to discuss whether concessions needed to be made.
Even if we had wanted to make concessions, it would not have been
easy to do so because there was really no common thread to the
rebels’ concerns. In fact, I decided that we should hold our ground,
and through the efforts of the whips and with the help of a superb
speech from Chris Patten — always an able debater — we won the
votes by a good margin. But I was under no illusion that victory in the
House of Commons would be sufficient to convince public opinion,
which had now turned strongly against the community charge.
THE POLITICAL CRISIS MOUNTS
By now the bad news about likely future levels of the charge was
coming through thick and fast. By January 1990 the DoE had yet

again raised its estimate of the average community charge to £340. We
were heading for double the original estimate. That had been bad
enough. Now in February, with local authorities likely to increase their
spending by some 15–16 per cent, the latest indications were that it
could be £20 or more higher.
Another piece of bad news was that the Retail Price Index Advisory
Committee had in its wisdom decided that the community charge
should be included in the RPI — treating it like the rates, but unlike
other direct taxes. But the massive reliefs to individual charge payers
should not be taken into account. This administrative fiction gave
another expensive upward twist to the RPI and greatly increased the
political damage which we were sustaining.

The political atmosphere was becoming grim. All my instincts told
me that we could not continue as we were. On Thursday 22 March we
sustained a very bad by-election defeat in Mid-Staffordshire, losing a
seat in which we had had a majority of over 19,000. The press was full
of outraged criticism of the community charge from Conservative
supporters. I was deeply worried. What hurt me was that the very
people who had always looked to me for protection from exploitation
by the socialist state were those who were suffering most. These were
the people who were just above the level at which community charge
benefit stopped but who were by no means well off and who had
scrimped and saved to buy their homes. Our new scheme of
transitional relief did not protect them against overspending councils.
Something more must be done.
My thoughts were crystallized by the discussion I had with Ken
Baker, Tim Bell and Gordon Reece over supper at Chequers on
Saturday 24 March. Their message was clear. It was vital to achieve
lower levels of community charge. If this were not done the political
consequences would be grave. This matched my analysis entirely.
There was widespread support for the principle that everyone
should pay something towards the cost of local government, which
only the community charge could ensure. When people complained
about its fairness they were not usually rehearsing the hackneyed —
and spurious — point about the hypothetical duke and dustman
paying the same. Unless the duke were very poor or the dustman very
wealthy this could not be so, because about half of local authority
expenditure was met out of general taxation which did reflect ‘ability
to pay’. The problem was the levels at which the charge was now
being levied and the fact that it was sudden and unexpected in its
impact, frequently bearing down on our own people. That was what
the authors of all those letters of complaint which I received were
really driving at. But what could now be done?
The essential point, I felt, was to ensure that central government
stepped in to protect the victims of what was essentially an arbitrary
abuse of power by irresponsible local authorities. Arguments about
accountability and the prospects for long-term improvement simply

had to take second place.
So on Sunday morning, before I began work with my advisers at
Chequers on drafting my speech to the Central Council, I rang the
Chancellor, John Major. I told him that I had been reading the papers
relating to community charge capping for 1990–91. I had a number of
fundamental concerns. The first was political. When the community
charge system had been developed we had assumed that if authorities
persisted with high levels of spending, the blame for the resultant high
community charges would fall on them rather than the Government.
But that was not in fact happening. The public were blaming us and
indeed the spending levels of a number of Conservative-controlled
councils as well. Second, the impact of high community charges was
falling on those in the middle income groups — what might be called
the ‘conscientious middle’. Those on low incomes were well protected
by the various rebate arrangements. Indeed, we were having to meet a
much higher public spending bill than expected for community charge
rebates because the charges themselves were so high. This would be
given a further twist because, since the levels of community charge
were pushing up the RPI, that would carry through into a higher than
expected uprating for all social security benefits next autumn. The new
system was not yet bringing about increased accountability. Nor did it
seem to me that this was likely to materialize in the second year
either. We could give some modest protection to charge payers in
1990–91 if we went ahead with the current proposals for charge
capping, and indeed we must do so. But the effect on average bills
would be marginal, at best. We therefore needed to consider radical
further measures in relation to 1991–2.
The main option seemed to be the introduction of a direct central
control over levels of local authority spending; for example, laying
down that expenditure by each authority could be no more than a
certain percentage above a Standard Spending Assessment (SSA) —
that is the level at which the authority needed to spend to deliver a
certain nationally uniform standard of service. That, however, would
need to be matched by a substantial increase in the level of
government grant to local authorities, perhaps with a larger
proportion of the total in the form of specific grants for particular
services. I saw no reason why it should not be possible for this dual
approach to reduce total public spending by local authorities. We
would then have to consider whether to continue with the community
charge as the sole means of financing expenditure above the level
allowed for, given that at present all the extra expenditure fell on the
charge. An alternative would be to place some of the burden of higher
spending on the business rate. All this pointed to the need for a major
internal review which would have to be carried out very speedily. It
would be necessary to indicate publicly that some kind of review was
under way, although the terms and manner of such an announcement
needed careful thought.

John Major did not dissent from my judgement that a radical review
was necessary. He also agreed that the changes we came up with must
control total public expenditure. I finished by saying that I would
speak very soon to Environment ministers to tell them what I wanted
done.
In one form or another I was to pursue this approach over the
months ahead — until, as I shall describe, unexpected legal advice
caused me to revise my views about the best practical way forward. I
did not, though, even then alter the view which I had now come to
about the future of local government finance. I still believed that the
local accountability which the community charge did so much to
strengthen would have a salutary effect. It would, not so incidentally,
help ensure that low-spending councils — generally Conservative —
were elected. But I had also seen — and did not intend to forget — the
perversity, incompetence and often straightforward malice of many
local councils. High-minded talk of local democracy must not be
allowed to obscure the low-level politics of the people we were up
against. That meant that central government must have adequate
powers — and be prepared to use them — to protect the individual
citizen against rogue authorities.
But the most public opposition to the community charge came not
from the respectable Tory lower-middle classes for whom I felt so
deeply, but rather from the Left. From 1988 a number of Labour MPs,
mostly in Scotland, had proclaimed their determination to break the
law and refuse to pay the community charge and the far Left were
agitating effectively in England too. They found little sympathy from
the law-abiding mass of Labour supporters. But there were enough
people ready to take the lead in organizing violent resistance. On
Saturday 31 March, the day before the introduction of the community
charge in England and Wales, a demonstration against the charge
degenerated into rioting in and around Trafalgar Square. There was
good evidence that a group of troublemakers had deliberately
fomented the violence. Scaffolding on a building site in the square was
dismantled and used as missiles; fires were started and cars destroyed.
Almost 400 policemen were injured and 339 people were arrested. It
was a mercy that no one was killed. I was appalled at such
wickedness.
For the first time a government had declared that anyone who could
reasonably afford to do so should at least pay something towards the
upkeep of the facilities and the provision of the services from which
they benefited. A whole class of people — an ‘underclass’ if you will —
had been dragged back into the ranks of responsible society and asked
to become not just dependants but citizens. The violent riots of 31
March in and around Trafalgar Square was their and the Left’s
response. And the eventual abandonment of the charge represented
one of the greatest victories for these people ever conceded by a
Conservative Government.

The trouble was that, because of the size of the bills now being sent
out, the new system had the very same law-abiding, decent people —
on whom we depended for support in defeating the mob — protesting
themselves. The riot did not, therefore, shift me from my
determination to continue with the community charge itself or to see
the criminals of that day brought to justice. But it did reinforce the
conclusions I had reached about the need to take effective action to
limit the burden it was placing on what I had described to John Major
as the ‘conscientious middle’.
In fact, unbeknown to me, the rioters were on their way up to
Whitehall as I was addressing the Central Council in Cheltenham.
I began my speech with what was to be the first of a number of
increasingly risky jokes about the political threat to my leadership.
Cheltenham’s reputation as the traditional retirement centre for those
who governed our former empire provided the peg. I began:
It’s a very great pleasure to be in Cheltenham once again. To avoid any
possible misunderstanding, and at the risk of disappointing a few gallant
colonels, let me make one thing absolutely clear: I haven’t come to
Cheltenham to retire.

I then went almost immediately to the heart of the issue about
which the Party was agonizing.:
Many of the bills for the community charge which people are now receiving
are far too high. I share the outrage they feel. But let’s be clear: it’s not the
way the money is raised, it’s the amount of money that local government is
spending. That’s the real problem. No scheme, no matter how ingenious,
could pay for high spending with low charges.

But I did go on to announce a number of limited special reliefs. Even
this modest package had necessitated my tearing up a feeble draft
from the Treasury and writing it myself. Given the weak draft, the
absence of colleagues and the late hour, however, I was not able to
write into my speech assurances of the weight and substance I would
have liked. So I had to content myself with hinting at my ideas about
further capping powers to deal with overspenders.
My main message, therefore, had to be that the way to have low
community charge bills was to vote Conservative in the forthcoming
local elections. I pointed to some of the figures for the charge to
illustrate my point.
It costs £96 more for the privilege of living in Labour Warrington than in
neighbouring Tory Trafford; £108 more in Labour Liverpool than in nextdoor Tory Wirral; and an appalling £339 more in Labour Camden than in
adjoining Tory Westminster.

But I also drew a wider lesson, and in doing so I deliberately sought
to move the political argument back to the greater questions of politics
which distinguished the Conservative from the socialist approach —
and back to the values for which I personally stood:

Our struggle with the Labour Party has never been a matter just of
economics. It concerns the way of life we believe is right for Britain now and
in the future. It concerns the values by which we live. Socialism is a creed of
the state. It regards ordinary human beings as the raw material for its
schemes of social change. But we put our faith in people — in the millions of
people who spend what they earn, not what other people earn. Who make
sacrifices for their young family or their elderly parents. Who help their
neighbours and take care of their neighbourhoods. The sort of people I grew
up with. These are the people whom I became leader of this party to defend.
The people who gave us their trust. To them I say, of course I understand
your worries. They are part of the fabric of my life too, and I share the
aspirations which you hold. You don’t expect the moon. But you do want the
opportunity to succeed for yourselves and your children.

The reception was good. But for them and for me the worries
remained.
TO CAP OR NOT TO CAP?
Now I had to ensure that my colleagues threw themselves as
wholeheartedly as I would into the job of protecting our people from
the kind of problems we were experiencing in 1990–91. There was not
much we could do as regards this year’s bills. The lawyers advised that
anything like the scale of capping I wanted to see was unlikely to be
sustainable in the courts. Consequently, Chris Patten could only
announce the capping of twenty councils. This was very disappointing.
But a defeat in the courts could have put the whole system in disarray
if, for example, the judges had found not just against a decision about
a particular council but against the fairness of the system of SSAs
which were crucial to the community charge.
All this reinforced the case for seeking new ways of holding down
local government spending — and so community charges — the
following year. I pressed with the Treasury and the Department of the
Environment my ideas for wide-ranging direct controls over local
authority spending combined with more extensive use of specific
grants. I had also come round to the idea of single-tier authorities
which — though the abolition of county councils would create a furore
with Tory councillors — would mean that the identities of the culprits
of overspending and high community charges were much clearer in
the eyes of local electors.
Chris Patten was strongly opposed to any kind of comprehensive
capping of local authorities. He argued against it both on the ground
that it would undermine the principle of local accountability and
because he thought such a system could not be got up and running in
time for 1991–2. But I insisted that the DoE should work up the
options. I wanted to see cuts in expenditure in some local authorities.
The local election results on Thursday 3 May 1990 strongly
suggested that where Conservative councillors and candidates used the
community charge in order to point up the differences between them

and the Labour Party and then worked to get out the Conservative
vote — rather than indulge in recrimination against the Government
— they could do very well. (Indeed, some of our councillors opposed
wider capping in 1990–91 on the ground that it would protect
profligate Labour councils from the electoral coup de grâce.)
Conservative successes in Wandsworth and Westminster were the
results of that approach. Where the Conservatives were in control of
an authority, the lower the charge it set, the better we did. The reverse
was true where Labour was in office. In this respect the community
charge was already transforming local government. There was the
prospect that, even in a bad year for the Conservative Party nationally,
local government elections could now be fought and won on genuinely
local issues and the local record, rather than the political control of
councils swinging according to national trends — something which
had always demoralized conscientious councillors of either party.
These successes, however, did not diminish the urgency of ensuring
that next year’s charge levels throughout the country were kept down.
Throughout May and early June papers were produced and discussions
between ministers and officials held. Chris Patten and I were still at
odds over the question of a general capping power. He was demanding
a substantial increase in central grant, sufficient to allow us to say
with credibility that responsible authorities would be able to set
charges in 1991–2 no higher than in 1990–91. I put some pressure on
him by refusing to allow any discussion about the level of next year’s
central grant until we had reached a decision on spending controls.
John Major was in two minds. On the one hand, as Chancellor, he
wanted to see effective controls on public spending. On the other,
perhaps as a former whip, he was worried about getting the
Parliamentary Party to pass the necessary new legislation for stronger
capping powers. And this was a fair point. A number of our backbenchers were now in a mood not far short of outright panic and it
was difficult to know how they would react to any new legislation
which appeared to give them a chance — through amendments — to
overturn key aspects of the community charge on which they thought
their own electoral fortunes would founder. Quite how the argument
would have ended up in government I do not know.
But suddenly the whole basis of our discussions was changed by new
legal advice. When we had met on the morning of Thursday 17 May
the lawyers advised that even new legislation on capping could be
undermined by judicial review. This seemed to me to be extraordinary.
It suggested that Parliament would not be allowed by the courts to
fulfil its duty to protect the citizen from unreasonable levels of
taxation: it cast doubt on our ability to control public expenditure and
manage the economy. At that point I asked for urgent advice about
how these difficulties could be overcome.
It is easy to imagine my surprise — and initial scepticism — when as
I worked through my boxes overnight on Wednesday 13 June I came

across a note from my private secretary reporting a telephone
conversation with government lawyers earlier that evening. Their view
now was that the present legislation — let alone any future legislation
— might be more robust than their earlier advice had indicated.* They
told us that we would be in a position to cap large numbers of
authorities as long as we made clear at an early stage in the budgetary
cycle what we would regard as an excessive increase in spending —
and we could achieve this without the difficulties which new
legislation would have brought. This legal advice was strengthened as
a result of the Government’s victory in a court case several days later
against a number of local authorities appealing against capping.
On the evening of Tuesday 26 June I held a meeting of ministers to
sort out exactly where we stood. The lawyers confirmed their advice
that it was unlikely that we could have any greater certainty about
capping under new legislation than under the present. I was reluctant
to drop the idea of introducing a general capping power. I would have
liked to combine this with the use of local referenda, so that an
authority which wanted to spend more than the limit set by central
government would have first to win the agreement of its electorate.
This would have done a good deal to defuse the accusation that new
spending controls would undermine local democracy. In the light of
the revised legal advice, though, I accepted that unless the courts came
up with some new judgement which changed the position it would be
best to cap in 1991–2 under the existing law. It was crucial, however,
to achieve the greatest possible deterrent effect and so Chris Patten
had to announce in July — well before local authorities set their
budgets — how he intended to use his powers. The other aspect we
had to discuss was the extra money which was needed to be put in in
order to limit the burden on individuals. Chris was authorized to
announce to the House certain extensions to the transitional relief
scheme and other changes.
The relevant Cabinet committee met the following week under my
chairmanship to finalize the community charge review and agree the
details of the 1991–2 settlement — the amount that we were going to
provide for local authorities in the form of grant and business rates,
and the amount that we thought they ought to spend. Chris Patten and
John MacGregor (the Chief Secretary) had already reached agreement
on a package. Our purpose was to endorse this: I also wanted to ensure
that it was understood that the extra money for the community charge
was not a sign that the brakes had been taken off public expenditure
control — far from it. We agreed that the local authorities ought to
spend £39 billion, an increase of 19 per cent over the same estimate
the previous year and an increase of 7 per cent over what they had
actually spent. This would produce a community charge at ‘standard
spending’ of £379. The actual community charge in a particular area
would of course depend on whether the local authority spent more or
less than this figure. It should be possible to keep the community

charge down below an average of £400 by vigorous use of charge
capping. Yet even so this sum was well over twice the original
estimate of the community charge which had been given to ministers.
I stressed that the extra money — almost £3 billion — going to reduce
the burden of the community charge would mean less for other
purposes. That was the priority we had chosen and all ministers must
abide by the consequences. Otherwise we would lose control of public
spending. Chris Patten announced these measures to the House of
Commons shortly afterwards. Some further details and modifications
were announced at the end of October.
The system of local authority finance which I bequeathed to my
successor remained unpopular. During the leadership contest in
November 1990 Michael Heseltine made great play with his pledge to
review the community charge and this prompted John Major and
Douglas Hurd to promise their own reviews as well. At the end of
March 1991 Michael Heseltine, once again Environment Secretary,
announced the outcome: the Government had decided to abandon the
community charge and to return to a property tax, supplemented by a
sharp rise in VAT from 15 to 17.5 per cent.
Few episodes of my period in government have generated more
myths than the community charge. It is generally presented as a
doctrinaire scheme forced on reluctant ministers by an authoritarian
Prime Minister and eventually rejected by popular opinion as
unworkable. Mistakes were certainly made in implementing the
charge, but this picture is a tissue of nonsenses. As Nigel Lawson has
generously conceded, few pieces of legislation have ever received such
a thorough and scrupulous examination by ministers and officials in
the relevant Cabinet committees as did the charge. Its difficulties arose
from a number of factors: the worsening economic and inflationary
situation; the fact that the estimates of the charge’s level proved
consistently misleading; and the certainty that any reform of local
government finance, after seventeen years of nonrevaluation, would
have produced many losers and therefore great unpopularity. The
conclusion I draw is that whatever reform was chosen, we should have
accompanied it with draconian restraints on local government
spending from the centre in order to prevent local authorities — alas
Conservative as well as Labour — from using the transition to jack up
spending and blame it on the Government.
The fact remains that the defects in our system of local government
finance were largely remedied by the charge, and its benefits had just
started to become apparent when it was abandoned. Those advantages
would have become steadily more evident as contracting out of local
authority services and improved local authority efficiency took effect.
But one further thing would have been necessary. Although the 1990
— 91 community charge capping proved relatively successful in
holding down local authority spending, it would probably also have
been necessary to introduce the much more far-reaching direct

controls over council spending to which my mind had anyway been
turning until our legal advice changed. It would have taken time
before the disciplines of the new system began to affect the behaviour
of the worst overspenders. But eventually they would have done so.
However, the community charge was abandoned. The fundamental
problems of local government — badly administered services, an
obscure relationship with central government, lack of effective local
accountability — not only remain: they will get worse.
Central government grant contributes a large proportion of local authority spending.
GREAs were an attempt to allocate grants to authorities on the basis of their ‘need to
spend’, as denned by central government on the basis of dozens of indicators covering
everything from an authority’s population to the state of its roads. The block grant
system altered the distribution of central government grant so that it provided a lower
proportion of local authorities’ expenditure if they spent significantly more than their
GREAs — in other words, the more a council overspent, the higher the proportion of its
spending ratepayers would have to meet. ‘Targets’ for individual local authorities
(based on past spending) were introduced later in an attempt to secure year-on-year
reductions in local authority spending: local authorities exceeding their targets actually
lost grant (‘holdback’). The Audit Commission was established in 1982 with
responsibility for auditing the accounts of local authorities in England and Wales and
with powers to undertake or promote work on value for money and efficiency.
*

Rates were levied at so many pence in the pound (the ‘poundage’) on the basis of the
rental value of the property, which was assessed by a general valuation carried out by
the Inland Revenue. Since the rental market in domestic property was small and
shrinking the valuations were often very artificial. In addition, obviously, their
accuracy deteriorated over time; hence the need for periodic revaluations.
*

A ‘full’ safety net was one that ensured there would be no losses or gains from the
abolition of ‘resource equalization’ during the first year of the charge.
*

The capping legislation allowed us to act on a number of different criteria. The
lawyers now advised that we could be much more rigorous than we had thought in
capping authorities which had made excessive increases of the charge year-on-year (as
opposed to capping those which had an excessive level of spending in a particular
year).
*

CHAPTER XXIII

To Cut and to Please
Tax cuts, tax reform and privatization

The 1980s saw the rebirth in Britain of an enterprise economy. This
was by and large a decade of great prosperity, when our economic
performance astonished the world. Whereas Britain lagged behind
other European Community countries in the 1960s and 1970s, our
economy grew faster in the 1980s than all of them except Spain.
Whereas most European economies in the 1980s grew more slowly
than they had the previous decade, the British economy grew faster.
From 1987 there were classic signs of ‘overheating’ and initial
confusion about what monetary indicators were showing. Nigel
Lawson’s shadowing the deutschmark meant that we did not take
action early enough to tighten monetary policy. That is not to say that
the surge of prosperity in these years was just or even mainly the
result of an artificial consumer boom. It was more soundly based than
that. The current account deficit which became a real problem must
not obscure — indeed to some degree it reflected — the fact that
industry was investing in the future during these years: in the 1980s
British business investment grew faster than in any other major
industrial country, with the exception of Japan. Profitability rose, and
so did productivity. The improvement in British manufacturing
industry’s productivity in the 1980s was greater than in any other
major industrial economy. New firms grew and expanded. New jobs
followed — 3,320,000 of them created between March 1983 and
March 1990.
It is, therefore, as important to understand what went right in these
years as what went wrong. Provided that the benefits are not reversed
by a combination of imprudent management of the public finances and
Euro-regulation, the fundamental improvements in the British
economy in the 1980s will endure. Where the problem arose was on
the ‘demand side’ as money and credit expanded too rapidly and sent
the prices of assets soaring, particularly non-internationally traded
goods like houses. This spiral was clearly unsustainable and had to
break or be broken. By contrast the ‘supply side’ reforms were highly
successful. These were the changes which made for greater efficiency
and flexibility and so enabled British business to meet the demands of
foreign and domestic markets. Without them, the economy would not
have been able to grow so fast and deliver such improvements in
profits, living standards and employment: in short, the country would
have been poorer.

Trade union reform was crucial. The most important changes were
those made between 1982 and 1984, which have already been
described in some detail. But the process continued right up to the
time I left office. The 1988 Employment Act, based on our manifesto
pledges, strengthened rights of individual trade unionists against
industrial action organized by their unions without a ballot and
against the unions’ attempts to ‘discipline’ them if they refused to go
out on strike. It also instituted a special commissioner to help
individual union members exercise their rights and opened up trade
union accounts for inspection. The 1990 Employment Act concluded
the long process of whittling away at the closed shop, which had held
so many in its vicious thrall in the 1970s. It now became unlawful to
deny someone a job because they were — or were not — a member of
a trade union. These reductions in trade union power, together with
the reinforcements of individual trade unionist’s rights and
responsibilities, were crucial to a properly functioning labour market,
in which restrictive practices were overcome and unit labour costs
kept down below the levels they would otherwise have reached. The
abolition of that monument to modern Luddism — the National Dock
Labour Scheme* — was another blow to restrictive practices.
Such reforms had a continuing and beneficial effect. It was not just
that they allowed management once more to manage and so ensured
that investment was once again regarded as the first call on profits
rather than the last; they also helped change the attitudes of
employees to the businesses for which they worked, and in which they
increasingly held shares. So in my last year in office there were fewer
industrial stoppages than in any year since 1935: under two million
working days were lost in this way, compared with approaching
thirteen million a year on average during the 1970s. Still too many, by
the way.

But there were other changes aimed at improving the quality of the
workforce by helping people to obtain the right qualifications and
experience for the jobs now available. In my last year as Prime
Minister some two and a half times as much — in real terms — was
being spent by government on training as under the last Labour
Government. Of course, there is always a danger that ‘training’
becomes an end in itself, with its own bureaucracy and momentum,
particularly when public funds on this scale are involved. So I was
keen that as much as possible of the administration and decisiontaking in these great state-funded programmes should be
decentralized. Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) were set up
from 1988 to take over responsibility for the delivery of these
programmes. They consisted of groups of local employers, who knew
more than any ‘expert’ what skills were actually going to be needed.
Another innovation in which I took a keen interest was the use of
Training Vouchers — which because of the corporatist sensibilities of
the training establishment I was always being urged to describe as

‘Credits’. Under this scheme, school leavers were given the choice of
where they would use their voucher to purchase a certain amount of
training from an employer, a local further education college or other
approved body. The basic psychology was that of any voucher: when
someone can exercise power over his own future he will take a closer
interest in it than under any system of central direction. And there is
absolutely no reason why those who are in receipt of state funding
should be deprived of choice or responsibility. This idea was at the
heart of the ‘empowerment’ approach of our 1987 manifesto reforms
and is, perhaps, of even more pressing relevance today when the
threat of welfare dependency is widely recognized.
Housing is vital to a properly working labour market.* If people
cannot move to regions where there are jobs — ‘getting on their bike’,
to quote Norman Tebbit’s immortal phrase — there will remain
pockets of intractable unemployment. And the less willing or able they
are to move, the greater call there will be for state intervention to
force or bribe firms to go to commercially unsuitable locations to
provide the jobs. The private rented sector of housing would be the
ideal source of cheap, often temporary, accommodation of the sort
that those seeking work are likely to want. After decades of rent
control, however, private landlordism — almost uniquely in Britain —
is popularly associated with exploitation and bad conditions. This
meant that it was never possible to take the radical action needed to
reverse the shrinkage in rented housing which has got steadily worse
since the First World War.
In our 1987 manifesto we promised — and subsequently in our
1988 Housing Act introduced — some measures to revive the private
rented sector. We further developed the two schemes — originally
introduced in 1980 — of the shorthold tenancy (short lets at market
rents, after which the landlord can regain possession) and the assured
tenancy (also market rents but with security of tenure). These
measures had some effect, at least halting the shrinkage in private
rented housing; but there will need to be a sea change in attitudes if it
is ever to grow to make a major contribution to labour mobility.
By contrast, council housing is the worst source of immobility. Many
large council estates bring together people who are out of work but
enjoy security of tenure at subsidized rents. They not only have every
incentive to stay where they are: they mutually reinforce each other’s
passivity and undermine each other’s initiative. Thus a culture grows
up in which the unemployed are content to remain living mainly on
the state with little will to move and find work.
So the great increase in private home ownership in my years as
Prime Minister and the corresponding reduction of the public sector’s
share of the housing stock was an important benefit to the economy.
Attempts were made to deny this on narrow financial grounds. In
particular, it was said that through mortgage tax relief too much of the
nation’s saving has been channelled into bricks and mortar, too little

into industry. This I never found convincing. First, it overlooks the fact
that many people whose main means of saving is by buying their
house on a mortgage would probably not otherwise invest their money
in shares or set up businesses: however pervasive an enterprise culture
is, most people are not born entrepreneurs. Indeed, buying a house is
for many people the gateway to other investments. Second, the idea
that British industry has fallen behind in recent decades because of a
lack of investment is at best a half-truth. The fact is that much of the
investment has been of the wrong sort and wrongly directed. What
Britain lacked in the past was the right opportunities to make use of
the investment available — because of low productivity, poor labour
relations, low profits and bad management. What is true is that a high
level of home ownership does need to be complemented by a
sufficiently large private rented sector, as ours is not. On this score we
were only half successful and the private rented sector is an area in
which, given time, I would have liked to do more.
It was a different story with deregulation of business. Year after year
— and with a further boost from David Young when he went to the
Department of Trade and Industry in June 1987 — unnecessary
regulations on business were identified and duly scrapped. David
Young also shifted the emphasis of the assistance received from the
DTI towards job creation, small firms and innovation. It was not just a
piece of gimmickry when what had principally been a sponsoring
Department for state-owned industries and heavy manufacturing was
rechristened the ‘Department for Enterprise’. The importance of a
continuing drive for deregulation is that otherwise reregulation is
never far behind. All the pressures of modern living (or at least of
modern politics) are for more controls — to protect consumers, to
protect investors, to protect the environment and, increasingly, to
protect powerful lobbies in the European Community. But the general
truth gets lost that more regulation means higher costs, less
competitiveness, fewer jobs and thus less wealth to raise the real
quality of life in the long run.
All of these areas — trade union power, training, housing and
business regulation — were ones in which in varying degrees we made
progress in strengthening the ‘supply side’ of the economy. But the
most important and far-reaching changes were in tax reform and
privatization. Tax cuts increased incentives for the shop floor as well
as the board room. Privatization shifted the balance away from the
less efficient state to more efficient private business. They were the
pillars on which the rest of our economic policy rested.
TAX CUTS AND TAX REFORMS
Nigel Lawson’s tax reforms mark him out as a Chancellor of rare
technical grasp and constructive imagination. We had some differences
— not least about mortgage tax relief which he would probably have

liked to abolish and whose threshold I would certainly have liked to
raise. But Nigel did not generally like to seek or take advice. Doubtless
he felt he did not need to. His was precisely the opposite of the
collegiate style which Geoffrey Howe before him practised. Nigel
preferred to take me through his budget proposals when he already
had them well worked out and without any private secretary present
to take notes. He liked to do this over dinner at No. 11 one Sunday
towards the end of January. Had I restricted informing myself of his
plans to these formal occasions it would have been difficult for me to
have any real influence; for to digest issues of such complexity over
after-dinner coffee would put a strain on anyone’s system. But in fact,
Treasury spies, realizing that this was an impossibly secretive way of
proceeding with someone who after all was ‘First Lord of the
Treasury’, furtively filled me in — with the strictest instructions not to
divulge what I knew — before Nigel proudly announced to me his
budget strategy. This at least put me in a better position to question
the proposed fiscal stance or to object to individual measures.
But the fact remains that Nigel’s budgets were essentially his. And
just as I hold him largely responsible for the errors of policy which
threw away our success on inflation, so I have no hesitation in giving
him the lion’s share of the credit for the ingenious measures in his
budgets.
The distinctive marks of Nigel’s budgets were clarity and cleverness.
Whereas Geoffrey Howe was instinctively a Chancellor who liked wellbalanced packages of measures, Nigel Lawson liked a budget with
everything based on one central theme and purpose. Geoffrey was
always one to go for the prudent course, even if the effect was undramatic, whereas Nigel’s search for the brilliant solution to a fiscal
problem could lead him to risk all on a winning streak. He was,
indeed, a natural gambler.

But the 1984 budget showed Nigel at his brilliant best. He abolished
the Investment Income Surcharge, which was a grossly unfair charge
on often elderly savers, and finally got rid of the National Insurance
Surcharge, which Geoffrey had already cut. But his most important
reform was the phasing out of tax reliefs for business at the same time
as he cut Corporation Tax rates, so improving the direction and quality
of business investment and greatly increasing incentives for business
success. Nineteen eighty-five was a less remarkable budget, but like
that of 1984 raised personal income tax allowances well above
inflation. In 1986 he made what I considered just the right political
judgement by cutting the basic rate of income tax by one penny,
which was in effect a statement that we would not ignore the basic
rate in future budgets when there was more fiscal leeway. He also
introduced Personal Equity Plans (PEPs) to encourage personal
investment in shares as a way of encouraging popular capitalism. In
1987 he cut two pence more off the basic rate, but balanced what
might have seemed a pre-election ‘give away’ with the incorporation

within the MTFS of the objective of a PSBR of 1 per cent of GDP, as a
standard of fiscal prudence.
More controversial was Nigel’s 1988 budget. I certainly had my
doubts at the time. I felt — rightly — that the overall financial
conditions had become too loose. Although it is monetary not fiscal
policy which has the decisive role in controlling inflation it is right to
look at taxes and borrowing too. Not only does the level of
government borrowing influence the level of interest rates needed to
exert monetary control; there is also an argument that if the private
sector is borrowing too much and saving too little — which is what
happened in 1988 and 1989 as the savings ratio fell to 5.6 and 6.6 per
cent — you should make up for this by raising taxes and cutting
government borrowing (or increasing government debt repayment).
I began by questioning the size — though not the kind — of tax cuts
Nigel now proposed, partly for these reasons and partly because I felt
— again rightly — that big income tax cuts in a climate of excessive
consumer and business confidence may have a psychological effect,
not directly predictable by the dubious science of economics, but real
nonetheless. They might fire up what already seemed to be
overheating. In fact, the figures which I saw on the eve of the budget
for the very large public sector debt repayment (PSDR) or budget
surplus — forecast in the budget at £3 billion (though the figure was
distorted by privatization proceeds) — considerably reassured me.
Moreover the budget surplus out-turn for 1988–9 was some £14
billion. I therefore believe that — with one apparently technical but in
fact significant qualification — Nigel’s 1988 budget was a success. The
cuts in the basic rate of income tax to 25 pence and the top rates to 40
pence provided a huge boost to incentives, particularly for those
talented, internationally mobile people so essential to economic
success.

The technical point which had such practical consequences was a
change in the system of mortgage tax relief, by which the £30,000
limit would no longer apply to each individual purchasing a property
but rather to the house itself. This removed the discrimination in
favour of unmarried cohabiting couples. Though announced in April,
however, it only took effect from August. This gave a huge immediate
boost to the housing market as people took out mortgages before the
loophole ended, and it happened at just the wrong time, when the
housing market was already overheating. That said, the overall tax
changes in the 1988 budget were of the right size and direction. If
they had not been accompanied by a loose monetary policy, all would
have been well.
By 1989 even Nigel’s usual apparently limitless confidence about
our economic prospects had become dented. Monetary policy had been
tightened sharply to cut back inflation. But what about fiscal policy? It
was clear that the budget surplus was a reflection at least as much of
the runaway pace of economic growth raising tax revenues as of

underlying financial soundness; even so it was difficult to argue that
such a large budget surplus should be increased still further.
And indeed when I saw Nigel for our usual discussion on Sunday 12
February, I found less difficulty than usual in persuading him to see
things my way. I urged him to revise his Cabinet paper, to be less
complacent, to drop the idea of a further one-penny cut in income tax
(which I said would look wrong psychologically), to forget his
proposal to remove the tax on the basic retirement pensions and to
scrap the earnings rule instead.* I also said that there must be no
loosening of monetary policy. He went along with all this: he then
used some of the revenue in hand to make sensible changes in the
structure of employees’ national insurance contributions.

But Nigel decided not to raise the excise duties with inflation, giving
an artificial downward twist to the inflation figure, which enabled him
to predict that inflation would rise to about 8 per cent before falling
back in the second half of the year to 5.5 per cent and perhaps 4.5 per
cent in the second quarter of 1990. However, by the second quarter of
1990 it was to reach not 4.5 per cent but approaching 10 per cent. The
degree of inflation that shadowing the deutschmark had injected into
the system was greater than anyone, including Nigel, had realized. But
by 1990 Mr 10 per cent had departed and others were left to deal with
the consequences.*
John Major was in some ways all too different from Nigel Lawson as
Chancellor. It seemed strange to me that, having been a competent
Chief Secretary, he did not feel more at home with tackling the
difficult issues he now faced when he returned to the Treasury. But
probably Nigel had made all the important decisions and John had not
had much of a look in. As preparation for the 1990 budget, we had a
seminar attended by John and me, Richard Ryder, the Economic
Secretary to the Treasury, and officials. (Nigel would never have
dreamed of such a thing before a budget.) It did not get us very far,
which was not John’s fault: the problem was that by now none of us
had any faith in the forecasts. I found myself in disagreement with
John on only one issue: I stopped consideration being given to a new
tax on credit. I had a good deal of sympathy with the proposition that
banks and building societies had made credit too easily available and
that this was leading feckless or just inexperienced borrowers into
debt. But I never doubted that if we once tried to stop this by imposing
a tax on it, all that general support which puritanical policies evoke in
principle would soon turn into a hedonistic outcry as video recorders,
expensive lunches, sports cars and foreign holidays moved out of
financial reach. The tax would also have put up the RPI, though this
would have been a once-and-for-all effect only. In fact, within the little
room for maneouvre available in these circumstances, John Major’s
only budget was a modest success, containing several eye-catching
proposals to boost the woefully low level of savings. But by then it
would take more than a sound budget — more even than a Prime

Minister and Chancellor who subscribed to the same policies — to
avert the political and economic consequences of allowing inflation to
rise.
The fact that the return of inflation and then recession obscured the
benefits of the tax changes Nigel Lawson’s budgets made does not
mean that those benefits had evaporated. Inflation distorts; but, once
tamed again, it turns out not to have destroyed the improvements in
economic performance which lower and simpler taxes bring. Only one
thing can undermine these supply side benefits: that is letting public
expenditure get out of control, which puts up borrowing and which
eventually requires tax increases that destroy incentives. When I left
office both public spending and borrowing were under tight control.
Indeed, we were still budgeting for a surplus. And during my period of
office public spending fell as a share of GDP from 44 per cent in 1979–
80 to 40.5 per cent in 1990–91. It has since risen to 45.5 per cent of
GDP (1993–4) and public sector borrowing to around £50 billion,
some 8 per cent of GDP. These figures bring strange echoes of the past.
In politics there are no final victories.
PRIVATIZATION
Privatization, no less than the tax structure, was fundamental to
improving Britain’s economic performance. But for me it was also far
more than that: it was one of the central means of reversing the
corrosive and corrupting effects of socialism. Ownership by the state is
just that — ownership by an impersonal legal entity: it amounts to
control by politicians and civil servants; and it is a misnomer to
describe nationalization, as the Labour Party did, as ‘public
ownership’. But through privatization — particularly the kind of
privatization which leads to the widest possible share ownership by
members of the public — the state’s power is reduced and the power
of the people enhanced. Just as nationalization was at the heart of the
collectivist programme by which Labour Governments sought to
remodel British society, so privatization is at the centre of any
programme of reclaiming territory for freedom. Whatever arguments
there may — and should — be about means of sale, the competitive
structures or the regulatory frameworks adopted in different cases, this
fundamental purpose of privatization must not be overlooked. That
consideration was of practical relevance. For it meant that in some
cases if it was a choice between having the ideal circumstances for
privatization, which might take years to achieve, and going for a sale
within a particular politically determined timescale, the second was
the preferable option.
But, of course, the narrower economic arguments for privatization
were also overwhelming. The state should not be in business. State
ownership effectively removes — or at least radically reduces — the
threat of bankruptcy which is a discipline on privately owned firms.

Investment in state-owned industries is regarded as just another call
on the Exchequer, competing for money with schools or roads. As a
result, decisions about investment are made according to criteria quite
different from those which would apply to a business in the private
sector. Nor, in spite of valiant attempts to do so (not least under
Conservative governments) can one find an even moderately
satisfactory framework for making decisions about the future of stateowned industries. Targets can be set; warnings given; performance
monitored; new chairmen appointed. These things help. But stateowned businesses can never function as proper businesses. The very
fact that the state is ultimately accountable for them to Parliament
rather than management to the shareholders means that they cannot
be. The spur is just not there.
Privatization itself does not solve every problem; though, as I shall
show, it certainly exposed hidden problems which could thus be
tackled. Monopolies or quasi-monopolies which are transferred to the
private sector need careful regulation to ensure against abuses of
market power, whether at the expense of competitors (if there are
such) or of customers. But on regulatory grounds there are good
arguments for private ownership as well: regulation which had, when
in the public sector, been covert now had to be overt and specific. This
provides a clearer and better discipline. And more generally, of course,
the evidence of the lamentable performance of government in running
any business — or indeed administering any service — is so
overwhelming that the onus should always be on statists to
demonstrate why government should perform a particular function
rather than why the private sector should not.
Now that almost universal lip service is paid to the case for
privatization it is difficult to recall just how revolutionary — how all
but unthinkable — it seemed at the end of the 1970s. Our 1979
manifesto had been quite cautious on the subject, promising: ‘to sell
back to private ownership the recently nationalized aerospace and
shipbuilding concerns, giving their employees the opportunity to
purchase shares’ and selling ‘shares in the National Freight
Corporation to the general public’.
The depth of the recession meant that there was not much prospect
of successful privatization in the early years, due to low market
confidence and large nationalized industry losses. But, for all that, by
the time of the 1983 election British Aerospace and the (now) National
Freight Consortium were flourishing in the private sector, the latter
after a spectacularly successful management and worker buy-out;
Cable and Wireless, Associated British Ports, Britoil (a nationalized
North Sea oil exploration and production company set up by Labour in
1975), British Rail Hotels and Amersham International (which
manufactured radioactive materials for industrial, medical and
research uses) had also in whole or in part been moved back to private
ownership.

The huge losses of British Shipbuilding and the massive
restructuring required of British Airways prevented their sale for the
moment; though in both cases the prospect of privatization was an
important factor in asserting tighter financial discipline and attracting
good management. The British Telecom Bill — to privatize BT — had
only fallen with the old Parliament and would be introduced with the
new. The 1983 manifesto mentioned all of these as candidates for
privatization as well as Rolls-Royce, substantial parts of British Steel
and of British Leyland and Britain’s airports. Substantial private capital
would also be introduced into the National Bus Company. And there
was the repeated promise of shares offered to employees in the
companies concerned. Perhaps the most far-reaching pledge, though,
was that we would seek to ‘increase competition in, and [attract]
private capital into the gas and electricity industries’. Gas was indeed
privatized in 1986. The more complicated and ambitious privatization
of electricity had to wait for the next Parliament.* In the 1987
manifesto both electricity and the water industry were the main
candidates for privatization. So over these years privatization had
leapt from fairly low down to somewhere near the top of our political
and economic agenda. This continued to be so for the rest of my time
in office. Why?
One reason I have already touched upon. Economic conditions
improved and the prospects for privatization improved with them. But
there is a further reason. Our privatization programme was constantly
breaking new ground. Each industry posed its own special problems.
Each flotation or trade sale raised separate issues. It is one of the
disadvantages of being in the vanguard of reform — as the British who
pioneered the industrial revolution know well — that the only
experience you can learn from is your own. Gradually, the general
emphasis switched from privatization of industries whose
nationalization was justified only by socialist dogma, to that of public
utilities where the arguments were more complex.
I was always especially pleased to see businesses which had
absorbed huge sums of taxpayers’ money and been regarded as
synonyms for Britain’s industrial failure pass out of state ownership
and thrive in the private sector. The very prospect of privatization
compelled such companies to make themselves competitive and
profitable. Lord King turned round British Airways by a bold policy of
slimming it down, improving its service to the customer and giving its
employees a stake in success. It was sold as a thriving concern in 1987.
British Steel, which had absorbed vast subsidies in the 1970s and early
’80s, re-entered the private sector as a profitable company in 1988.
But it was perhaps BL (now known as the Rover Group) whose return
to private ownership caused me most satisfaction — in spite of the
almost endless arguments about how much its private sector
purchaser, the once state-owned British Aerospace, had received.

Rover had by now a superb Chairman in Graham Day who had been
making great efforts to do what I had always hoped would be done —
dispose of surplus assets and increase the drive for higher productivity.
But that did not mean that I was happy with the sort of figures the
company’s Corporate Plans contained. It retained an apparently
insatiable appetite for cash — it had absorbed £2.9 billion of public
money in total since we came to office in 1979 — and the
Government’s liabilities under the Varley-Marshall assurances
remained at some £1.6 billion. The earlier anti-American hysteria
about takeovers by foreign companies of our British car production
meant that the prospects for sale of the main car business did not look
promising,* though both Ford and Volkswagen continued to express
some interest.
This was the position when, just before Christmas 1987, there were
signs that British Aerospace might be interested in acquiring Rover. I
was not immediately clear that British Aerospace’s was a serious offer.
But it soon turned out that it was. There was an industrial logic in the
acquisition, for the car business — if relieved of its burden of debt and
provided with a substantial injection of new investment — would
complement the rest of BAe’s business. Aerospace depends on gaining
a few huge contracts at inevitably irregular intervals; cars satisfy a
steadier market. And, of course, the sale to BAe would have one
marked political advantage: the company would stay British.
David Young was subsequently heavily criticized for the way in
which the deal was struck. In fact, he played a difficult hand with
great aplomb. The special financial provisions of the deal only
reflected the poor state of BL after years of state ownership and wasted
investment. That the terms had to be revised reflected the new interest
of the European Commission in probing the details of state aid to
industry, rather than being a reflection on the basic soundness of the
deal itself.
Only satisfied customers can ultimately guarantee the future of a
business or the jobs depending on it and Rover could not be an
exception to that rule. But the effects of the disastrous socialist
experiment to which the company had been subject had now been
overcome; and Rover was back in the private sector where it belonged.
PRIVATIZATION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
British Telecom was the first utility to be privatized. Its sale did more
than anything else to lay the basis for a share-owning popular
capitalism in Britain. Some two million people bought shares, about
half of whom had never been shareholders before. But the relationship
between privatization and liberalization — that is opening up
telecommunications to wider competition — was a complex one. The
first steps of liberalization had begun under Keith Joseph who split

British Telecom from the Post Office, removed its monopoly over
telephone sales and licensed Mercury to provide a competing network.
Further liberalization took place at the time of privatization.
But if we had wanted to go further and break up BT into separate
businesses, which would have been better on competition grounds, we
would have had to wait many years before privatization could take
place. This was because its accounting and management sytems were,
by modern standards, almost nonexistent. There was no way in which
the sort of figures which investors would want to see could have been
speedily or reliably produced. So I was well satisfied when, after the
delay which had been caused by the need to withdraw the original bill
with the advent of the 1983 general election, British Telecom was
eventually successfully privatized in November 1984.
At the same time, a system of regulation was established under the
control of an Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL) with the result
that BT had to keep its price increases at a fixed level below the rate of
inflation for a number of years. This was a quite new and — as it has
turned out — influential departure. Not only did the ‘RPI minus x’
formula become the model for dealing with public utility
privatizations in Britain: it has since been adopted overseas, for
example in the United States.
The consequences of privatization for BT were seen in a doubling of
its level of investment, now no longer constrained by the Treasury
rules applying in the public sector. The consequences for customers
were just as good. Prices fell sharply in real terms, the waiting list for
telephones shrank and the number of telephone boxes in operation at
any particular time increased. It was a convincing demonstration that
utilities were better run in the private sector.
Many of the same issues arose in the privatization of British Gas,
which had been a nationalized industry for nearly forty years. BGC
had five main businesses. These were: the purchase of gas from the oil
companies which produced it; the supply of gas, involving the
transmission and distribution of gas from the beach-head landing
points to the customer; its own exploration for and production of gas,
mostly from offshore fields; the sale of gas appliances through its
showrooms; and the installation and servicing of those appliances. Of
these functions only the second — the supply of gas to consumers —
could be described as a natural monopoly. But there were a number of
considerations which argued against fundamentally restructuring or
breaking up the business. The most important of these, curiously
enough, was lack of parliamentary time. Consideration of privatization
had inevitably been held up by the miners’ strike of 1984–5. Both the
BGC and Energy Secretary, Peter Walker, were determined to privatize
BGC as a whole and their full co-operation was essential if it were to
be achieved as I wanted during our second term. There was much to
be said for using the model of British Telecom rather than trying to
come up with a fundamentally different one under these conditions.

Accordingly, at a meeting I held with Peter Walker, Nigel Lawson
and John Moore on Tuesday 26 March 1985 I agreed that we should
go for a sale of the whole business. The formula for regulation and the
issue of liberalizing imports and exports of gas became the focus of
much argument between Peter Walker who was prepared to accept a
degree of monopoly as the price of early privatization on the one
hand, and the Treasury and the DTI on the other who would have
preferred stronger competition from the first. We were able to
liberalize gas exports but I went along with most of Peter Walker’s
arguments in order to achieve privatization in the available timescale.
I still think I was right to do so because the privatization was a
resounding success. (The problems of the monopoly power of British
Gas are now being investigated by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.) Four and a half million people invested in the shares,
including almost all of the company’s 130,000 employees.
The privatization of the water industry was a more politically
sensitive issue. Much emotive nonsense was talked along the lines of,
‘look, she’s even privatizing the rain which falls from the heavens.’ I
used to retort that the rain may come from the Almighty but he did
not send the pipes, plumbing and engineering to go with it. The
Opposition’s case was even weaker than this, for about a quarter of the
water industry in England and Wales had long been in the private
sector. Of more significance was the fact that the water authorities did
not just supply water: they also safeguarded the quality of rivers,
controlled water pollution and had important responsibilities for
fisheries, conservation, recreation and navigation. It was Nick Ridley
— a countryman with a natural feel for environmental issues — who,
when he became Environment Secretary, grasped that what was wrong
was that the water authorities combined both regulatory and supply
functions. It made no sense that those who were responsible for the
treatment and disposal of sewage, for example, should also be
responsible for regulating pollution. So the bill which Nick introduced
also established a new National Rivers Authority. Privatization also
meant that the companies would be able to raise money from capital
markets for the investment needed to improve the water quality.
The most technically and politically difficult privatization — and the
one which went furthest in combining transfer of a public utility to the
private sector with radical restructuring — was that of the Electricity
Supply Industry. The industry had two main components. First, there
was the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) which ran the
power stations and the National Grid (the transmission system).
Second, there were the twelve Area Boards which distributed the
power to customers. (In Scotland there were two companies running
the industry — the South of Scotland Electricity Board and the North
of Scotland Hydro Board.) Some attempt had been made in Nigel
Lawson’s 1983 Energy Act to introduce competition into the system.
But it had had no practical effect. As a result the whole of the industry

was based on monopoly. The CEGB had a monopoly nationally and the
Area Boards monopolies regionally. The challenge for us would be to
privatize as much as possible of the industry while introducing the
maximum amount of competition.
I had an initial discussion about electricity privatization with Peter
Walker and Nigel Lawson on the eve of the 1987 general election. I
did not intend to keep Peter at Energy so there was no point in going
into detail. But we did agree that the pledge of privatization should be
included in the manifesto and be given effect in the next Parliament.
When Cecil Parkinson took over as Energy Secretary after the
election he found that the department’s thinking had been strongly
influenced by Peter Walker’s corporatist instincts — and by their
recognition that Walter Marshall would be passionately opposed to the
break-up of the CEGB of which he was chairman. The prevailing idea
seemed to be that the CEGB and the National Grid would be floated as
one company and the twelve Area Boards would be combined into
another. This would have done no more than change a monopoly into
a duopoly; but Cecil changed all this. He was subsequently the butt of
much malicious and unjust criticism because of the changes which his
successor, John Wakeham, had to make in his original privatization
strategy, particularly in connection with the nuclear power stations. In
fact, it was Cecil who took the bold and right decision to reject both
corporatist thinking and vested interests by breaking up the CEGB and
— most crucially — removing from its control the National Grid. The
grid would now be owned jointly by the twelve distribution companies
created from the old Area Boards rather than by the CEGB. Whereas
under the old system the controller of the grid was also its near
monopoly supplier, control would now be with those who had the
strongest interest in ensuring that as much competition as possible be
allowed to develop in power generation. These two decisions meant
that competition became effective.
Cecil Parkinson was working towards this model over the summer of
1987 and in September we had a seminar at Chequers to look at the
options. At this stage none was ruled out, but I insisted that all the
legislation must be enacted before the end of that Parliament. Cecil
continued to work up the plans and discussed them again with me and
other ministers in mid-December. No one was attracted by solutions
which retained a monopoly of generation for the CEGB or its
continued ownership of the grid. The real question was whether the
CEGB should be divided up into just two or as many as four or five
competing generating companies. Nigel Lawson favoured the more
radical option. The trouble was that it was difficult to see any of these
companies being large enough to keep up the very costly development
of nuclear power, which I regarded as essential both in order to ensure
security of power supply and for environmental reasons.
There was also Walter Marshall to consider. Not only did I like and
admire him. I also felt that we all owed him a great debt for having

kept the power stations working during the miners’ strike. He was
opposed to any break-up of the CEGB, but he might just be willing to
go along with a two-way split in which the larger company retained
the nuclear power stations. There was no way in which he would have
stayed on if the CEGB had been split into four. I could not, of course,
allow his views to be decisive: nor did I do so. But I hoped to obtain
his and his colleagues’ co-operation in the difficult transition to the
new privatized and competitive system. So at a meeting in midJanuary I came down on the side of the solution that Cecil favoured.
But I added that this did not preclude moving at some future time to
the more competitive model which Nigel Lawson would have
preferred.

Later that month I agreed that the split in capacity between the two
new proposed generating companies should be 70/30. This was the
plan which I tried to sell to Walter Marshall when he came in with
Cecil Parkinson for a long talk one February evening. Walter — never
averse to blunt speaking — did not conceal his disagreement with the
approach we favoured. I agreed with him — as he knew I did — about
the great importance of nuclear power. But I did not think that its
prospects would be damaged by our plans. Again and again I insisted
that whatever structure we created must provide genuine competition.
I often found that straight talking pays dividends. On further
consideration and after further discussions with Cecil, Walter Marshall
said that though the CEGB would express regret at what we had
decided he was prepared to make the system work. Cecil Parkinson’s
plans were also strongly opposed by Peter Walker who suggested that
it would take at least eight years before there was any chance of
completing this competitive model of privatization. None of us was
convinced by this. So on Thursday 25 February Cecil could make his
statement to the House of Commons setting out how we intended to
privatize electricity.
This, though, was by no means the end of the matter. As always, the
prospect of privatization meant that the finances of the industry were
subject to searching scrutiny, perhaps for the first time ever. And what
came to light was extremely unwelcome. For environmental reasons
and to ensure security of supply, I felt it was essential to keep up the
development of nuclear power. The real cost of nuclear energy
compared with other energy sources is often overrated. Coal-fired
power stations pour out carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and no
one has yet put a credible figure on what it will ultimately cost to deal
with the resulting problem of global warming. But the fact remained
that there would be an immediate extra cost from nuclear energy
which consumers would have to bear. This was tolerable if not
popular.
But in the autumn of 1988 the figures for the cost of
decommissioning the now ageing power stations were suddenly
revised sharply upwards by the Department of Energy. These had been

consistently underestimated or perhaps even concealed. And the more
closely the figures were scrutinized the higher they appeared. By the
summer of 1989 the whole prospect for privatizing the main
generating company which would have the nuclear power stations
started to look in jeopardy. So I agreed that the older Magnox power
stations should be taken out of the privatization and remain under
government control. This was one of Cecil’s last actions at Energy and
it fell to his successor, John Wakeham, to deal with the rest of the
nuclear problem.
Alan Walters had been urging from the previous autumn that all the
nuclear power stations should be removed from the privatization. As
so often, he turned out to be right. It was never a matter of safety,
which could perfectly well have been ensured in the private sector, but
rather of cost. The figures for decommissioning the other power
stations started to look uncertain and then to escalate, just as those for
Magnox had done. John Wakeham recommended and I agreed that all
nuclear power in England and Wales should be retained in state
control. One consequence of this was that Walter Marshall, who
naturally wanted to retain the nuclear provinces in his empire, decided
to resign, about which I was very sad. But the other consequence was
that privatization could now proceed, as it did, with great success, to
the benefit of customers, shareholders and the Exchequer.
The result of Cecil Parkinson’s ingenious reorganization of that
industry on competitive lines is that Britain now has perhaps the most
efficient electricity supply industry in the world. And as a result of the
transparency required by privatization we also became the first
country in the world to investigate the full costs of nuclear power —
and then to make proper financial provision for them.
PLANS FOR FURTHER PRIVATIZATION
I have already mentioned the impact electricity privatization would
have on the coal industry. Clearly, a privately owned electricity
industry would be much more demanding in the commercial terms it
expected from the NCB than would a state-owned monopoly. But in
any case I always wanted to have the coal industry return to the
private sector. In November 1990, not long before I left Downing
Street, John Wakeham and I discussed the prospects for coal
privatization, though not the detailed means. I felt that a combination
of trade sales to companies with mining interests with special terms
for the miners to buy shares would probably be the best way forward.
How many of the pits had a long-term commercial future was unclear.
We were still mining too much high-cost, deep-mined coal — a
situation which had come about because of the protected and
monopolistic market the nationalized coal industry had enjoyed. So
there would have to be closures.

But — both when Cecil was Energy Secretary and when John
succeeded him — I never had regard to the commercial aspects alone.
The memories of the year-long coal strike were unforgettably etched
on my mind. I kept in touch with Roy Lynk, the Nottinghamshire
leader of the UDM, who knew that he could speak to me, if and when
he needed, and I made sure that both Cecil and John understood my
feelings about the need to protect the interests of his members. First, I
felt a strong sense of obligation and loyalty to the Nottinghamshire
miners who had stayed at work in spite of all the violence the
militants threw at them. And, second, I also knew we might have to
face another strike. Where would we be if we had closed the pits at
which moderate miners would have gone on working, and kept more
profitable but more left-wing pits open?
I also refused to allow the NCB to sidestep the agreed procedure of
referring closures to the independent colliery review body, which had
been set up as part of the settlement of the miners’ strike. I had
learned from hard experience that you must never allow yourself to be
manoeuvred into taking drastic action on pit closures when a steady,
low-key approach will secure what is needed over a somewhat longer
period. In dealing with the coal industry you must have the mentality
of a general as much as that of an accountant. And the generalship
must often be Fabian rather than Napoleonic.
The other privatization project which I was considering at this time
was that of British Rail. BR’s subsidiaries had already been sold. It was
the main businesses we had now to consider. Cecil Parkinson and I
considered how to proceed in October 1990. Cecil was keen to
privatize the separate rail businesses — like Inter-City, Freight,
Network South-East. I, for my part, saw attractions in the idea of a
national Track Authority which would own all the track, signalling
and stations and then private companies would compete to run
services. But these were large questions which needed careful thought
and economic analysis. So I agreed with Cecil that a working party
involving the Treasury and DTI as well as the Transport Department
be set up to study the isuue and report back to me. That was as far as I
could take the issue.
There was still much I would have liked to do. But Britain under my
premiership was the first country to reverse the onward march of
socialism. By the time I left office, the state-owned sector of industry
had been reduced by some 60 per cent. Around one in four of the
population owned shares. Over six hundred thousand jobs had passed
from the public to the private sector. It constituted the greatest shift of
ownership and power away from the state to individuals and their
families in any country outside the former communist bloc. Indeed,
Britain set a worldwide trend in privatization in countries as different
as Czechoslovakia and New Zealand. Some £400 billion of assets have
been or are being privatized worldwide. And privatization is not only
one of Britain’s most successful exports: it has re-established our

reputation as a nation of innovators and entrepreneurs. Not a bad
record for something we were constantly told was ‘just not on’.
*
*

See p. 355.

See also Chapter 20.

The earnings rule limited in the early years of retirement the amount a pensioner
could earn without reducing his pension.
*

**
*
*

For Nigel Lawson’s resignation see pp. 15–18.

On both of which, see pp. 681–5.
See pp. 437–41.

CHAPTER XXIV

Floaters and Fixers
Monetary policy, interest rates and the exchange rate

A correct economic policy depends crucially upon a correct judgement
of what activities properly fall to the state and what to people. The
state has to set a framework of laws, regulation and taxes in which
businesses and individuals are then free to operate. But there also has
to be a financial framework for policy. After a long struggle during my
first term, from 1979 to 1983, like-minded ministers and I had largely
converted the Cabinet, the Conservative Party and opinion in the
worlds of finance, business and even the media to a more restrictive
view of what the state’s role in the economy should be. Moreover, as
regards the regulatory framework within which business could run its
affairs, there was a general understanding that lower taxes, fewer
controls and less interference should be the goal. But as regards setting
the overall financial framework, within which the real economy
generates wealth, there was less common ground. Whereas Nigel
Lawson and I agreed strongly about the role of the state in general, we
came sharply to differ about monetary and exchange rate policy.
Our success in bringing down inflation in our first term from a rate
of 10 per cent (and rising) to under 4 per cent (and falling) had been
achieved by controlling the money supply. ‘Monetarism’ — or the
belief that inflation is a monetary phenomenon, i.e., ‘too much money
chasing too few goods’ — had been buttressed by a fiscal policy which
reduced government borrowing, freeing resources for private
investment and getting the interest rate down. This combined
approach had been expressed through the Medium Term Financial
Strategy (MTFS) — in large measure Nigel Lawson’s brainchild.* Its
implementation depended heavily on monitoring the monetary
indicators. These, as I have noted, were often distorted, confusing and
volatile. We needed other indicators as well. So, before the end of
Geoffrey Howe’s Chancellorship the value of the pound against other
currencies — the exchange rate — was also being taken into account.
It is important to understand what the relationship between the
exchange rate and the money supply is — and what it is not. First
consider the effect of an increase in the exchange rate; that is, one
pound sterling is worth more in foreign currency. Because most import
and export prices are fixed in foreign currencies, the sterling prices of
these tradeable goods will fall. But this only applies to goods and
services which are readily imported and exported, like oil, grain or
textiles. Many of the goods and services that comprise our national
income are not of this sort: for example, we cannot export our houses

or the services provided in our restaurants. The prices of these things
are not directly affected by the exchange rate, and the indirect effect
— passed on via wages — will be limited. What does more or less
determine the prices of houses and other ‘non-tradeables’, however, is
the money supply.
If the money supply rises too fast, the prices of non-tradeable
domestic goods will rise accordingly, and a strong pound will not
prevent that. But the interaction of a strong pound and a loose money
supply causes the export sector to be depressed, resources to flow to
houses, restaurants and the like. The balance of trade will then go into
larger and larger deficits, which have to be financed by borrowing
from foreigners. This kind of distortion just cannot last. Either the
exchange rate has to come down, or monetary growth has to be
curtailed, or both.
This result is of the utmost importance. Either one chooses to hold
an exchange rate to a particular level, whatever monetary policy is
needed to maintain that rate. Or one sets a monetary target, allowing
the exchange rate to be determined by market forces. It is, therefore,
quite impossible to control both the exchange rate and monetary
policy.
A free exchange rate, however, is fundamentally influenced by
monetary policy. The reason is simple. If a lot more pounds are put
into circulation, then the value of the pound will tend to fall — just as
a glut of strawberries will cause their value to go down. So a falling
pound may indicate that monetary policy has been too loose.
But it may not. There are many factors other than the money supply
which have a great influence on a free exchange rate. The most
important of these are international capital flows. If a country reforms
its tax, regulatory and trade union arrangements so that its after-tax
rate of return on capital rises well above that of other countries, then
there will be a net inflow of capital and its currency will be in
considerable demand. Under a free exchange rate, it would appreciate.
But this would not be a sign of monetary stringency: indeed, as in
Britain in 1987 to mid-1988, a high exchange rate may well be
associated with a considerable monetary expansion.
It follows from this that if the exchange rate becomes an objective in
itself, as opposed to one indicator among others for monetary policy,
‘monetarism’ itself has been abandoned. It is worth repeating the point
because it is of such importance to understanding the arguments
which took place: you can either target the money supply or the
exchange rate, but not both. It is an entirely practical issue. The only
effective way to control inflation is by using interest rates to control
the money supply. If, on the contrary, you set interest rates in order to
stick at a particular exchange rate you are steering by a different and
potentially more wayward star. As we have now seen twice — once
when, during my time, Nigel shadowed the deutschmark outside the
ERM and interest rates stayed too low; once when, under John Major,

we tried to hold to an unrealistic parity inside the ERM and interest
rates stayed too high — the result of plotting a course by this
particular star is that you steer straight on to the reefs.
ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION (EMU)
These questions were not ones for the technicians alone: they went to
the very heart of economic policy, which itself lies at the heart of
democratic politics. But there was an even more important issue which
was raised first by argument about whether sterling should join the
ERM and then, in a more acute form, about whether we should accept
European Community proposals for Economic and Monetary Union
(EMU). This was the issue of sovereignty. Sterling’s participation in the
ERM was seen partly as proof that we were ‘good Europeans’ (a phrase
which in fact increasingly meant bad Europeans, as the Community
adopted a selfish, protectionist stance to liberated eastern Europe). But
it was also seen as a way of abdicating control over our own monetary
policy, in order to have it determined by the German Bundesbank.
This was what was meant when people said we would gain credibility
for our policies if we were — to adopt another Euro-metaphor —
‘anchored’ to the deutschmark. Actually, the metaphor is strangely
appropriate: for if the tide changes and you are anchored, the only
option to letting out more chain as your ship rises is to sink by the
bows; and in an ERM where revaluations were ever more frowned
upon there was no more chain to let out. Which leads on to EMU.
The ERM was seen by the European Commission and others as a
path to EMU — and this subtly changed the former’s purpose. But
EMU itself — which involves the loss of the power to issue your own
currency and acceptance of one European currency, one central bank
and one set of interest rates — means the end of a country’s economic
independence and thus the increasing irrelevance of its parliamentary
democracy. Control of its economy is transferred from the elected
government, answerable to Parliament and the electorate, to
unaccountable supra-national institutions. In our opposition to EMU,
Nigel Lawson and I were at one. Indeed, perhaps the most powerful
critique of the whole concept was that contained in Nigel’s lecture at
Chatham House in January 1989 when he said:
It is clear that economic and monetary union implies nothing less than
European government — albeit a federal one — and political union: the
United States of Europe. That is simply not on the agenda now, nor will it be
for the foreseeable future.

Alas, by his pursuit of a policy that allowed British inflation to rise,
which itself almost certainly flowed from his passionate wish to take
sterling into the ERM, Nigel so undermined confidence in my
government that EMU was brought that much nearer.

EARLY DISCUSSION OF THE EXCHANGE RATE MECHANISM (ERM)
To trace the course of our arguments in government about the
Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System (EMS) it
is necessary to go right back to our first year in office. The Foreign
Office and the Treasury both had an interest; the former regarded it as
a question of European relations, the latter — rightly — as an
economic question. I decided early on to be closely involved in the
issue and held an initial meeting to discuss the question in October
1979. In retrospect, the balance of opinion in the Cabinet is of some
significance. Geoffrey Howe as Chancellor was against membership at
present, partly because of uncertainty about the effects of abolishing
exchange controls. The then Governor of the Bank of England, though
he agreed, was more enthusiastically in favour. Keith Joseph and John
Nott were against. So was I. But since we had devised the formula that
we would join when the ‘time was right’ (or ‘ripe’ as it was sometimes
expressed) there seemed no need to change our basic position. The
time was not ‘right’ and no one seriously thought it was. Geoffrey
Howe gave no hint of his future position. Indeed, in December he
came to see me to complain that in a speech he had made about the
subject in Brussels Peter Carrington had been too positive about the
EMS.
Even at this stage, the basic arguments for and against the ERM
were known, though none of us had, of course, given as much thought
to the subject as we would do later. Britain had already had an
unhappy experience of trying to peg sterling in a European currency
system. In 1972 Ted Heath’s Government had ignominiously been
forced to leave the European ‘snake’ — the forerunner of the ERM —
after a mere six weeks. So any British Government would need to be
cautious.
There were two other matters which bore on the decision. First,
there was no disguising, for reasons I have explained, that there was
always going to be potential for conflict between our domestic
monetary policy and an exchange rate target — this was brought out
clearly in Treasury papers prepared for us now. Second, we were
conscious — perhaps over-conscious as Alan Walters would argue —
of sterling’s position as a ‘petro-currency’. The pound’s value was
affected by the discovery and exploitation of huge quantities of North
Sea oil. This had the apparently perverse result that whereas higher oil
prices increased the value of the pound, they would generally reduce
the value of other western European currencies. But the greatest
destabilizing factor was the appalling condition of the British economy
in 1979. Until inflation had been brought under control and the public
finances restored, it was not, in my view, realistic to consider
participation in the ERM.

But in early 1980 Helmut Schmidt was urging me to enter the ERM
and I was anxious to be as co-operative as possible to the Germans
because I needed their support on the question of our Community
budget contributions. So I reopened the question. The more I looked at
the papers and the facts they revealed, the more sceptical I became.
The Treasury were firmly against our joining. They noted that if we
had joined in September 1979 there would have had to be very heavy
intervention in the exchange markets — selling pounds — to hold
sterling down. I chaired a meeting on the subject in March 1980 at
which I opened by saying that domestic monetary policy must remain
paramount. After we had argued all the points through, we concluded
that we should not join in the immediate future but stick to the line
that we intended to join when conditions permitted.
There was further discussion in the autumn of 1981. It will be
remembered that this was a difficult time when some of the gains of
lower interest rates obtained through our tough 1981 budget looked as
if they might be dissipated as a result of international pressures.
United States interest rates rose as the Federal Reserve Bank attempted
to restrain the inflationary pressure generated during the previous
Carter presidency: throughout the world interest rates followed. I
asked Geoffrey Howe to bring forward a paper looking once again at
the question of whether we should join the ERM. Opinion among
Treasury ministers was divided. But both Geoffrey Howe and Leon
Brittan (then Chief Secretary) were against our joining. The position of
Nigel Lawson, then Financial Secretary, was less clear.
I said that I would need to be convinced that there were positive
arguments for joining, not just an insufficiency of arguments against.
My caution was reinforced by powerful advice from Alan Walters. His
view was that it was wrong to think of the ERM as a force for stability.
It did not even have the — arguable — merits of a system of fixed
exchange rates. The parities moved within a band. Then, after
bumping along against the ceiling or the floor, they would go through
a process of periodic realignments in which the rates moved in
discrete jumps. These movements, moreover, were the subject of
political horse-trading rather than the workings of the market — and
the market does a better job.
After several postponements as a result of other pressures on my
diary, I eventually chaired another meeting on the subject in January
1982. Geoffrey Howe’s view was still that this was not the right time
to join. I agreed. I said that I was not convinced that there would be
solid advantage in joining the ERM. I did not believe that in practice it
would provide an effective discipline on our economic management.
Rather, it removed our freedom of manoeuvre. I accepted, however,
that when our inflation and interest rates moved much closer to those
of West Germany the case for joining would be more powerful. For the
time being, we would maintain our existing position on the issue.

ARGUMENTS ABOUT THE ERM: 1985
There could be no question of our entering the ERM on the eve of a
general election, so this was the situation which Nigel Lawson
inherited when I made him Chancellor in 1983. At this time the
exchange rate was just one factor being taken into account in order to
assess monetary conditions. It was the monetary aggregates which
were crucial. The wider measure of money — £M3 — which we had
originally chosen in the MTFS had become heavily distorted. A large
proportion of it was in reality a form of savings, invested for the
interest it earned. In Nigel’s first budget (1984) he set out different
target ranges for narrow as well as broad money. The former — M0 —
had been moving upward a good deal more slowly and this was taken
into account in plotting the future course. But at this stage M3 and M0
were formally given equal importance in the conduct of policy. Other
monetary indicators, including the exchange rate, were also taken into
account. Our critics, who had until now denounced our policy as a
rigid adherence to a statistical formula, began to denounce our
rootless and arbitary pragmatism. And indeed, sensible as this change
was, it was to mark the beginning of a process by which the clarity of
the MTFS became muddied. This in turn, I suspect, caused Nigel, as
the years went by, to search with increasing desperation for an
alternative standard — reliable in itself, convincing to the markets —
which he finally thought he had found in the exchange rate.
Events in January 1985 brought the ERM back into discussion. The
dollar was soaring and there was intense pressure on sterling, in spite
of the soundness of Britain’s finances. I agreed with Nigel that our
interest rates should be raised sharply. I also agreed with Nigel’s view
that there should be co-ordinated international intervention in the
exchange rates to achieve greater stability, and I sent a message to this
effect to President Reagan. This policy was formalized by Nigel and
other Finance ministers under the so-called ‘Plaza Agreement’ in
September. In retrospect, I believe that this was a mistake. As Alan
Walters would always argue, if intervention is ‘sterilized’, that is to say
not allowed to affect the money supply and short-term interest rates, it
will have only a fleeting effect; on the other hand, if it does promote
monetary growth then it will be inflationary. The Plaza Agreement
gave Finance ministers — Nigel above all perhaps — the mistaken idea
that they had it in their power to defy the markets indefinitely. This
was to have serious consequences for all of us.
Sterling’s problems also prompted Nigel to raise with me in
February the issue of the ERM. He said that in his view controlling
inflation required acceptance of a financial discipline which could be
provided either by monetary targets or by a fixed exchange rate. It was
essentially a secondary matter which of these was chosen. But new
factors, argued Nigel, favoured the ERM. First, it was proving difficult

to get financial markets to understand what the Government’s policy
towards the exchange rate really was: the ERM would provide much
clearer rules of the game. There was also a political consideration.
Many Conservative MPs were in favour of joining. In arguments about
additional spending and borrowing it would, he thought, be helpful to
be faced with a discipline which MPs themselves accepted. Entry into
the ERM would also move the focus of attention away from the value
of the pound against the dollar — where, of course, the problem at
this particular moment lay. Finally, £M3 was becoming increasingly
suspect as a monetary indicator because its control depended
increasingly on ‘overfunding’, with the resulting rise in the so-called
‘bill mountain’.* I was not convinced on any of these counts, with the
possible exception of the last. But I agreed that there should be a
seminar involving the Treasury, the Bank of England and the Foreign
Office to discuss it all.
Alan Walters could not attend the seminar and so he let me have his
views separately. He put his finger on the key issue. Would
membership of the ERM reduce the speculative pressure on sterling?
In fact, it would probably make it worse. That was the lesson to be
drawn from what had happened to other ERM currencies, like the
franc. Moreover, in view of Britain’s open capital and exchange
markets and the international role of sterling, we would be subject to
greater pressures than France.
At my seminar Nigel did not argue that it would be right to enter
the ERM under current circumstances. But he repeated the general
argument in favour of joining which he had put to me earlier. Perhaps
the most significant intervention, however, was that of Geoffrey Howe
who had now been converted to the Foreign Office’s departmental
enthusiasm for the ERM and thought that we should be looking for an
appropriate opportunity to join — though he too did not think the
circumstances at the moment were right. In the course of the
discussion it became clear that we would need to build up foreign
exchange reserves if we wanted to be in a position to enter. I agreed
that the Treasury and the Bank of England should consider how this
should be done. But since no one was arguing for immediate entry,
there was no other decision to take. The meeting ended amicably
enough.
During the summer of 1985 I started to become concerned about the
inflation prospect. I was uneasy for a number of reasons. £M3 was
rising rather fast. Property prices were increasing, always a dangerous
sign. The ‘bill mountain’ was worrying too — not because it suggested
anything about inflation (indeed the overfunding which led to it was
in part the result of the Bank’s attempt to control £M3). Rather, since
we had decided against a policy of overfunding as far back as 1981,
the fact that it had been resumed on such a scale without
authorization did not increase my confidence in the way policy in
general was being implemented.

Even now it is unclear whether my misgivings were justified. Some
analysts — notably the perceptive Tim Congdon — would argue that
the rise in £M3 now and later did cause inflationary problems. By
contrast, Alan Walters, who believed that MO was the best indicator,
reckoned that monetary policy was sufficiently tight, as did the rest of
my advisers. Essentially, these tricky questions are always a matter of
judgement. The important thing is that when clear evidence appears
that things are slipping you take action fast. Certainly, I do not believe
that monetary policy in 1985 — or 1986 — was the main cause of the
problems we were later to face.
Nigel now returned to the charge on the ERM. I agreed to hold a
further seminar at the end of September. The subject seemed to be
becoming something of an idée fixe. Nigel even sent me a paper
envisaging what would happen if we were in the ERM in the run-up to
a general election which the financial markets thought that we might
lose. In such circumstances, he argued, we would need to announce
our temporary cessation from operating the system coupled with an
undertaking that on our return to office after the election we would
immediately resume at the same parity as before. In itself, of course,
this was an example of the perils of committing oneself to fixed
parities irrespective of outside events.
By now I was more convinced than ever of the disadvantages of the
ERM. I could see no particular reason to allow British monetary policy
to be determined largely by the Bundesbank rather than by the British
Treasury, unless we had no confidence in our own ability to control
inflation. I was extremely sceptical about whether the industrial lobby
which was pressing us so hard to join the ERM would maintain its
enthusiasm once they came to see that it was making their goods
uncompetitive. I doubted whether the public would welcome what
might turn out to be the huge cost of defending sterling within the
ERM — which, indeed, might well prove to be impossible in the runup to a general election and so be compounded by a forced
devaluation. Looking back over the last few years it was clear that
sterling had not tracked other European currencies in a stable way. In
1980, sterling rose 20 per cent against the European Currency Unit
(ecu). In 1981 it fell by 15 per cent from peak to trough. In 1982 it did
the same. In 1983 it rose by as much as 10 per cent. In 1984 it was
somewhat more stable. But in 1985 it had risen by more than 10 per
cent. To control such movements, we would have needed recourse to
huge quantities of international reserves and to a very tough interest
rate policy.
There was nothing secret about these facts. They were available to
anyone who wanted to know them. But nothing is more obstinate than
a fashionable consensus. Nor is it without influence on Cabinet
committees. I had no support at the seminar at the end of September.
Nor did my arguments budge Nigel and Geoffrey. There was no point
in continuing the discussion. I said that I was not convinced that the

balance of argument had shifted in favour of joining. I said that I
would hold a further meeting to which other colleagues would be
invited.
Before this took place I had a long list of questions drawn up about
the implications of the ERM. I hoped that these would illuminate some
of the points we would need to discuss. It would be more charitable
than accurate to suggest that the answers provided by the Treasury did
so. Yet the paper which Nigel presented at the meeting now seems
strangely prophetic. He suggested that we had to convince people that
inflation would continue to come down and stay down, adding that
there was still a nagging fear that sooner or later we would succumb
to the temptation of going for an easy inflationary option. He also
suggested that after a period of some years sticking to the same policy,
this now needed a shot in the arm, a touch of imagination and
freshness to help the explanation and to ensure that our policies
continued to carry conviction. Entry into the ERM was, of course, the
answer. Since it was Nigel’s policy of shadowing the deutschmark —
an informal version of ERM entry — that was to lead to inflation and
undermine confidence, there now seems a certain irony in these
assertions.
It has to be said that the wider meeting which I held to discuss the
ERM on the morning of Wednesday 13 November did not advance us
any further than the earlier meetings. We went over the same ground
and at the end I repeated that I had not been convinced by the
arguments I had heard. However, I agreed that we should strictly
maintain the line we had taken so far, namely that Britain would join
the ERM ‘when the time was right’.
The position was unsatisfactory. Most of the arguments which
persuaded me that we should not now enter the ERM applied to the
principle — not just the circumstances — of entry. I knew that I was in
a very small minority within the Cabinet on this matter, though most
of my colleagues were probably not overinterested in it anyway.
Geoffrey and Nigel, by contrast, were fervent. For Geoffrey
membership of the ERM would be a demonstration of our European
credentials. For Nigel it would provide stability in the turbulent and
confusing world in which decisions about interest rates and monetary
policy had to be made. And there is no doubt that those decisions
could on occasion be extremely difficult.
INTEREST RATES AND INFLATION: 1986
It is worth noting at this point where the difficulty lay — and where it
did not. Until 1987 when Nigel made the exchange rate the overriding
objective of policy, there was no fundamental difference between us,
although Nigel apparently now thinks I was ‘soft’ on interest rates.
Anyone who recalls our decisions from 1979 to 1981 will find that
implausible. It would also surprise anyone who considers that one of

the main arguments advanced for joining the ERM, which Nigel so
passionately wanted, was that it would lead to lower interest rates.
And, as I shall show subsequently, there were occasions when I
thought that he was soft on interest rates and wanted to raise them
more quickly.* The two of us were equally opposed to inflation. If
anything, I was more concerned than he was. It was my constant
refrain that much as I might admire his fiscal reforms, he had made no
further progress in getting down the underlying inflation rate.
Nevertheless, Nigel and I did have rather different starting points
when it came to these matters. I was always more sensitive to the
political implications of interest rate rises — particularly their timing
— than was Nigel. Prime Ministers have to be. I was also acutely
conscious of what interest rate changes meant for those with
mortgages. Although there are several times as many savers as
borrowers from building societies, it is the borrowers whose prospects
— even lives — can be shattered overnight by higher interest rates.
My economic policy was also intended to be a social policy. It was a
way to a property-owning democracy. And so the needs of home
owners must never be forgotten. Other things being equal, on every
ground a low interest rate economy is far healthier than a high interest
rate economy.
High real interest rates* do ensure that there is a high real reward
for saving. But they discourage risk-taking and self-improvement. In
the long run, they are a force for stagnation rather than enterprise. For
these reasons I was cautious about putting up interest rates unless it
was necessary.
Another reason for caution was the difficulty of judging precisely
what the monetary and fiscal position was. The MO figures were
volatile from month to month. The other aggregates were worse. We
were given figures which underrated economic growth and so caused
us to exaggerate the likely size of the PSBR. In these circumstances,
making the right judgement about when and whether to cut or raise
interest rates was indeed difficult. So at the meetings I had with Nigel,
the Bank and Treasury officials to decide on what must be done I
would generally cross-examine those involved, give my own reaction
and then — when I was sure all the factors had been considered — go
along with what Nigel wanted. There were exceptions. But they were
very few.
SHADOWING THE DEUTSCHMARK: 1987–1988
It was only from March 1987 — though I did not know it at the time
— that Nigel began to follow a new policy, different from mine,
different from that to which the Cabinet had agreed, and different
from that to which the Government was publicly committed. Its
origins lay in the ambitious policy of international exchange rate
stabilization. In February Nigel and other Finance ministers agreed on

intervention to stabilize the dollar against the deutschmark and the
yen by the ‘Louvre Accord’ agreed in Paris. I received reports of the
massive intervention this required which made me uneasy. And it was
not clear how long this would last.
In July Nigel raised again with me the question of whether sterling
should join the ERM. He felt that the first year of a new Parliament
would be the right time to join. Membership would give us as much
exchange rate stability as it was possible to achieve and help business
confidence. I was not unprepared for this and had earlier talked the
subject through with Alan Walters and Brian Griffiths, the head of my
Policy Unit who in an earlier incarnation had been Director of the
Centre for Banking and International Finance at the City University. I
said to Nigel that the Government had built up over the last eight
years a well-founded reputation for prudence. By joining the ERM we
would in effect be saying that we could not discipline ourselves and
needed the restraint provided by Germany and the deutschmark. ERM
membership would reduce the room for manoeuvre on interest rates
which would, at times of pressure, be higher than they would be if we
were outside. I had heard the arguments about external discipline
before. I recalled that Ted Heath had claimed in the early 1970s that
European Community membership would help discipline the trade
unions. But this had not happened; and the attempt to use ERM
membership to influence the expectations of management and
workforces would be an equal failure. Overall, when things were going
smoothly membership of the ERM would add nothing to our economic
policy-making, and when things were going badly membership would
make things worse. Nigel completely rejected this. He said he would
want to discuss it all again with me in the autumn. I said that was
much too soon: I would not wish to hold a further discussion on the
subject until the New Year.
By now there was some evidence that the economy might be
growing at a rate too strong to be sustainable. The monetary figures
were ambiguous, but the PSBR looked as if it would turn out much
lower than expected at the time of the budget. In August 1987 Nigel
proposed a 1 per cent rise in interest rates on the grounds that this was
required to defeat inflation by the next election. I accepted the
proposal. That was the position when on ‘Black Monday’ (19 October
1987) there was a sharp fall in the Stock Market, precipitated by a fall
in Wall Street. These developments were, in retrospect, no more than a
market correction of overvalued stocks, made worse by ‘programmed
selling’. But they raised the question of whether, far from overheating,
we might now be facing a recession as people spent less and saved
more in order to make up for the decline in the value of their shares.
I was in the United States when I learnt about the Stock Market
collapse. I had flown from the Commonwealth Conference at
Vancouver to Dallas, where I was to stay with Mark and the family. As
it happens I dined that evening with some of America’s leading

businessmen and they put what had happened in perspective, saying
that, contrary to some of the more alarmist reports, we were not about
to see a meltdown of the world economy. Still, I thought it best to
make assurance doubly sure, and I agreed to Nigel’s request for two
successive half percentage point cuts in interest rates in response to
help restore business confidence.
What I did not know was that Nigel was setting interest rates
according to the exchange rate so as to keep the pound at or below
DM3. It may be asked how he could have pursued this policy since
March without it becoming clear to me. But the fact that sterling
tracks the deutschmark (or the dollar) over a particular period does
not necessarily mean that the pursuit of a particular exchange rate is
determining policy. The same effect can have several causes. There are
so many factors involved in making judgements about interest rates
and intervention that it is almost impossible at any particular time to
know which factor has been decisive for whoever is in day-today
charge.
Of course, as the months pass and people look back at what has
been happening questions begin to be asked. Nigel, who is nobody’s
fool, must have recognized that this would happen. Indeed, he
presumably intended it. Had all gone well, it would have been taken
as proof that we could enter the ERM at about DM3 with no adverse
consequences. He would have been able to overturn my veto on entry
under circumstances in which it was almost impossible for me to
reimpose it. To some extent, indeed, this is what happened, though he
did not actually force us into the ERM. Once the financial markets
have become convinced that a particular policy — in this case
shadowing the deutschmark at a particular parity — is the central
guarantee of financial stability, the effect of moving away from this
approach is profoundly destabilizing. That is why, when I discovered
what was happening, I found we had already forfeited some of our
freedom of action.
Extraordinarily enough, I only learnt that Nigel had been shadowing
the deutschmark when I was interviewed by journalists from the
Financial Times on Friday 20 November 1987. They asked me why we
were shadowing the deutschmark at 3 to the pound. I vigorously
denied it. But there was no getting away from the fact that the chart
they brought with them bore out what they said. The implications of
this were, of course, very serious at several levels. First, Nigel had
pursued a personal economic policy without reference to the rest of
the Government. How could I possibly trust him again? Second, our
heavy intervention in the exchange markets might well have
inflationary consequences. Third, perhaps I had allowed interest rates
to be taken too low in order that Nigel’s undisclosed policy of keeping
the pound below DM3 should continue.
I did not want to raise this matter with Nigel until I was absolutely
sure of my ground. So I brought together as much information as I

could about what had been happening to sterling and the extent of
intervention. Then I tackled him. At our meeting on Tuesday 8
December I expressed very strong concern about the size of the
intervention needed to hold sterling below DM3. Nigel argued that the
intervention had been ‘sterilized’ by the usual market operations and
that it would not lead to inflation. I understood sterilization to mean
that the Bank sold treasury bills and gilts to ensure that the
intervention funds did not affect short-term interest rates. But the
large inflow of capital, even if sterilized in this sense, had its own
effect, on the one hand in increasing monetary growth and on the
other in putting additional downward pressure on market interest
rates. This was an environment where Nigel superficially could justify
lower base rates than domestic pressures warranted. As a result,
inflation was stoked up.
In the early months of 1988 my relations with Nigel worsened. I
sought to discourage too much exchange rate intervention, but
without much success. It seemed to me contradictory to raise interest
rates — as we did by half a percentage point in February — while at
the same time intervening to hold down sterling. But, equally, I knew
that once I exerted my authority to forbid intervention on this scale it
would be at the cost of my already damaged working relationship with
Nigel. He had boxed himself into a situation where his own standing
as Chancellor would be weakened if the pound went above DM3. It
was a convincing if unwelcome demonstration of the folly of regarding
a particular exchange rate parity as the criterion for political and
economic success.
By the beginning of March, however, I had no option. On 2 and 3
March 1988 over £1 billion of intervention took place. The Bank of
England, which is traditionally all for a managed exchange rate, was
deeply anxious about the policy. So, I knew, were senior Treasury
officials, though of course they could not say so openly.
I had the matter out with Nigel at two meetings on Friday 4 March.
I again complained about the level of exchange rate intervention. For
his part, Nigel said it would be sterilized. But he did accept that
intervention at the present rate could not continue indefinitely. I asked
him to consult the Bank of England and report back later that day on
whether the DM3 ‘cap’ should be removed and, if so, when. When he
returned he accepted that if on Monday there was still strong demand
for sterling the rate should be allowed to go above DM3. He was keen
to have some further intervention to break the speed at which the
exchange rate might rise. I expressed my concern about this and said
that my strong preference would be to allow time for the rate to find
its own level without any intervention. But I was prepared to go along
with some limited intervention if necessary. The pound accordingly
rose through the DM3 limit.
Immediately, the Opposition and the media sought to make capital
out of divisions between Nigel and me. I set out the policy accurately

and the thinking behind it in the House of Commons on Thursday 10
March at Prime Minister’s Questions:
My Rt. Hon. Friend the Chancellor and I are absolutely agreed that the
paramount objective is to keep inflation down. The Chancellor never said
that aiming for greater exchange rate stability meant total immobility.
Adjustments are needed, as we learnt when we had a Bretton Woods system,
as those in the EMS have learnt that they must have revaluation and
devaluation from time to time. There is no way in which one can buck the
market.

This last remark however provoked a flurry of press comment to
which truth was no defence. The trouble was that it appeared to
contrast with Nigel’s continuing public statements that he did not
want to see the exchange rate appreciate further. From now on it
would be increasingly difficult to convince the markets that my
Chancellor and I were at one. And, of course, the perception they had
was basically an accurate one.
The question arises whether at some point now or later I should
have sacked Nigel. I would have been fully justified in doing so. He
had pursued a policy without my knowledge or consent and he
continued to adopt a different approach from that which he knew I
wanted. On the other hand, he was widely — and rightly — credited
with helping us win the 1987 election. He had complete intellectual
mastery of his brief. He had the strong support of Conservative backbenchers and much of the Conservative press who had convinced
themselves that I was in the wrong and that only pettiness or pigheadedness could explain the different line I took. Whatever had
happened, I felt that if Nigel and I — supported by the rest of the
Cabinet — pulled together we could avert or at least overcome the
consequences of past mistakes and get the economy back on course for
the next general election.
But this was not to be. Whatever I said in the House in answer to
questions about interest rates and the exchange rate was given a
construction to suggest that either I was not endorsing Nigel’s views or
that I was protesting too much — and so unconvincingly — my
adherence to them. In these situations you just cannot win. Nigel was
extremely upset over my remarks at Prime Minister’s Questions on
Thursday 12 May. Though I warmly supported him and his public
statements I had not repeated Nigel’s view that further exchange rate
appreciation would be ‘unsustainable’.
Geoffrey Howe was now also making mischief. From this time on it
became clear to me that Nigel and he — by no means on friendly
terms in earlier years when there was a good deal of jealousy between
them — were in cahoots, and that of the two Geoffrey was the more
ill-disposed to me personally. Earlier — in March — Geoffrey had
made a speech in Zurich which was widely taken as siding with Nigel
against me on the question of the exchange rate. Then on Friday 13
May he quite gratuitously slipped into his speech to the Scottish Party

Conference in Perth the remark, apropos of our commitment to join
the ERM ‘when the time is right’, that: ‘We cannot forever go on
adding that qualification to the underlying commitment.’ This led the
press to widen the perceived rift between me and Nigel over the ERM
once more. I was not best pleased. When Geoffrey imprudently
telephoned me the morning after his speech to ask for a meeting at
which he and the Chancellor should come to see me later in the day to
‘settle the semi-public dispute’, I told him that I would be seeing Nigel
later in the day to discuss the markets — which Geoffrey’s own
remarks had unsettled. But I was not seeing them together. I told him
three times — since he did not seem to take it in and persisted in his
attempt to contrive a meeting at which he and Nigel could get their
way — that the best thing he could do now was to keep quiet. We
were not going into the ERM at present and that was that.
I spent Sunday at Chequers working on a speech I was to deliver to
the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland: there was some mirth
when my speech writers and I were discovered down on our knees in
an appropriate posture, though drawing on the resources of sellotape
rather than the Holy Spirit. But, following the news reports during the
day, I was also aware of just how damaging the constant media reports
of splits and disagreements on the exchange rate were becoming.
Nigel arranged to see me on the Monday. He wanted to agree a
detailed formulation for use by me in the House to describe our policy.
I had been told by the Treasury in advance of the meeting that Nigel
wanted a further interest rate cut. For my part, I had become appalled
at the size of our intervention in the money markets which was clearly
still failing to hold sterling at the level Nigel wanted and which, in
spite of assurances from Nigel, I feared might prove inflationary. But I
had got part of what I wanted — which would ideally have been a
pound which found its own level in the markets — in that sterling had
been allowed to rise to DM3.18. So I was not unhappy to have the
suggested interest rate cut I knew he wanted. I was also aware that the
speculators were beginning to consider sterling a one-way bet and that
allowing them to burn their fingers a little would do no end of good.
Above all, however, this reduction of the interest rate on Tuesday 17
May by half a point to 7.5 per cent was the price of tolerable relations
with my Chancellor, who believed that his whole standing was at stake
if the pound appreciated outside any ‘band’ to which he might have
semi-publicly consigned it. If I had refused both intervention and an
interest rate cut and sterling had drifted up to find its proper level
there was little doubt in my mind that Nigel would have resigned —
and done so at a time when both the majority of the Parliamentary
Party and the press supported his line rather than mine. Yet the
economic price of accepting this political constraint now seems to me
to have been too high. For the whole of this period the interest rate
was too low. It should have been a good deal higher, whatever the
effect on the level of sterling — or the level of the Chancellor’s blood

pressure.
I also agreed to use in the House a detailed endorsement of the line
which Nigel and I had agreed at our Monday meeting on the place of
the exchange rate as an element in economic policy. I had to go
further than I would have liked, saying:
We have taken interest rates down three times in the last two months. That
was clearly intended to affect the exchange rate. We use the available levers,
both interest rates and intervention as seems right in the circumstances
and… it would be a great mistake for any speculator to think at any time
that sterling was a one-way bet.

ECONOMIC PROBLEMS MOUNT
In fact from June 1988 onwards interest rates rose steadily. Nigel
insisted on raising them only half a per cent at a time. I would have
preferred something sharper to convince the markets how seriously we
took the latest indicator that the economy was growing too fast and
that monetary policy had been too lax — namely the balance of
payments figures. Nigel took a more laid-back view of these than I did.
He thought that the current account balance of payments deficit,
which was growing ever larger, was more important as an indicator
that other things were going wrong than in its own right. But the
deficit worried me because it confirmed that as a nation we were
living beyond our means — as well as suggesting that higher inflation
was on the way.
House prices were rising sharply. MO was still growing too fast —
outside its target range. The forecasts of inflation were constantly
being revised upwards, though they still turned out to be too low. For
example, in the September 1988 monthly Treasury Monetary
Assessment inflation in March 1989 was forecast at 5.4 per cent. In
October’s note the forecast was 7 per cent. (In fact it turned out to be
7.9 per cent.) So as 1988 drew to a close — and although
unemployment was down and growth and incomes were well up —
there was trouble ahead.
It is on the face of it extraordinary that at such a time — November
1988 — Nigel should have sent me a paper proposing an independent
Bank of England. My reaction was dismissive. Here we were wrestling
with the consequences of his diversion from our tried and tested
strategy which had worked so well in the first Parliament; and now we
were expected to turn our policy upside down again. I did not believe,
as Nigel argued, that it would boost the credibility of the fight against
inflation. In fact, as I minuted, ‘it would be seen as an abdication by
the Chancellor when he is at his most vulnerable.’ I added that ‘it
would be an admission of a failure of resolve on our part.’ I also
doubted whether we had people of the right calibre to run such an
institution. As I told Nigel when he came in to discuss his paper, I had
thought in the late 1970s about having an independent central bank

but had come down against it. I considered it more appropriate for
federal states. But in any case there could be no question of setting up
such a bank now. Inflation would have had to be well down — to say
2 per cent — for two or three years before it could be contemplated.
In fact, I do not believe that changing well-tried institutional
arrangements generally provides solutions to underlying political
problems — and the control of inflation is ultimately a political
problem. It can be kept down if you have the will to do so, as the
Germans do because of their bitter experience of hyperinflation. We
too could have kept it down if we had pursued a sufficiently tight
monetary policy — without an independent central bank. What
perhaps I should have taken more notice of, however, was that this
proposal of Nigel’s showed his attitude to the economic difficulties
now clearly visible on the horizon. He wanted to pass the
responsibility for them to something — or someone — else.
The year 1989 — Nigel’s last as Chancellor — was a time of
increasing political difficulty for me. It was the tenth anniversary of
my becoming Prime Minister — an anniversary which I insisted should
be kept as low-key as possible but which was inevitably the occasion
for unflattering reviews in the press designed to leave the reader with
the strong feeling that ten years of me was quite enough. It was also a
time of very high interest rates — 13 per cent in January, 14 per cent
from May and 15 per cent from October — and with inflation still
rising and the forecast figures apparently inexorably rising too. The
trade figures continued to be bad, especially July’s, which undermined
confidence and weakened the pound. Alan Walters’s view was that
there was now too tight a monetary squeeze which would push the
economy into a serious recession. In particular, he strongly advised
against raising interest rates to 15 per cent, as Nigel wanted in
response to a rise in interest rates in Germany. Alan was right. But I
went along with Nigel’s judgement and up went interest rates again. It
is perhaps sufficient comment on the later allegation that I was
undermining the Chancellor’s position by not dismissing Alan Walters,
that I backed Nigel against Alan’s advice and against my own instincts
just days before Nigel walked out.
THE DELORS REPORT ON EMU
Apart from the conduct of monetary policy, there were two economic
issues of substance which concerned us during this period. On the first
— the ERM — Nigel and I were sharply at odds. On the second —
European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) — we were in
complete agreement.
As a result of the Hanover European Council in June 1988 a
Committee of European Community central bank heads — serving in a
personal capacity — had been set up under the chairmanship of
Jacques Delors to report on EMU.* Nigel and I hoped that together

Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Governor of the Bank of England, and Karl
Otto Pöhl, President of the Bundesbank, would prevent the emergence
of a report which would give momentum to EMU. Herr Pöhl we
considered strongly hostile to any serious loss of monetary autonomy
for the Bundesbank and Robin Leigh-Pemberton was in no doubt about
the strength of our views — and indeed those (at this stage) of the
great majority of the Parliamentary Conservative Party and of the
House of Commons. Our line was that the report should be limited to a
descriptive not a prescriptive document. But we hoped that paragraphs
would be inserted which would make it clear that EMU was in no way
necessary to the completion of the Single Market and which would
enlarge upon the full implications of EMU for the transfer of power
and authority from national institutions to a central bureaucracy.
Nigel and I had met the Governor on the evening of Wednesday 14
December 1988 and urged him to make all these points in the
discussions on the text which ensued. We saw the Governor again on
the afternoon of Wednesday 15 February. What we had seen of the
draft report seemed thoroughly unsatisfactory, along lines known to be
favoured by M. Delors who was clearly making the running. Nigel and
I wanted the Governor to circulate his own document; but when this
appeared it was something of a mouse. Most damaging of all was that
Herr Pöhl’s known opposition to the Delors approach simply was not
expressed.
Whatever the Governor may have done proved ineffective. When the
Delors Report finally appeared in April 1989 it confirmed our worst
fears. From the beginning there had been discussion of a ‘three-stage’
approach, which might at least have allowed us to slow the pace and
refuse to ‘advance’ further than the first or second stage. But the report
now insisted that by embarking on the first stage the Community
committed itself irrevocably to the eventual achievement of full
economic and monetary union. There was a requirement for a new
treaty and for work on it to start immediately. There was also plenty
of material in the treaty about regional and social policy — costly,
Delorsian socialism on a continental scale. None of these was
acceptable to me.
THE AMBUSH BEFORE MADRID
Whatever problems the Delors Report raised, it won few friends at
home. However, Nigel and then Geoffrey used it to reopen the
argument about the ERM. Nigel argued at our meeting on the
afternoon of Wednesday 3 May that we should now enter the ERM. I
replied that the overriding priority must be to get down the rate of
inflation and it would be quite wrong to adopt the objective of
exchange rate stability. This is what we had done when we had been
trying to shadow the deutschmark, and it had compromised our battle
against inflation. I did not believe that the Delors Report on EMU

altered the balance of argument on the ERM. On the contrary, we
should certainly not be drawn further into a European system that
would almost certainly change following the Delors Report. I did not
accept the premise that it was necessary to join the ERM in order to
prevent developments in the Community which we did not like. I
thought that the idea of setting a target date for joining some time in
the future would be particularly damaging. Nigel disagreed. But I said
that I did not want the issue of UK membership of the ERM to be
raised at this stage.
This did not mean that I was giving no thought to it. Indeed, a few
days later Alan Walters sent me a paper entitled ‘When the time will
be ripe’, spelling out the conditions which must be met before we
would join. He suggested that all the constituent countries must have
abolished all foreign exchange controls and the legal machinery
through which they were imposed. All domestic banking systems and
financial and capital markets must be deregulated and open to
competitive entry from EC countries. Any institution, corporation,
partnership or individual must be free to enter any banking or
financial business, subject only to minimum prudential conditions.
These were bold suggestions. On the one hand, they would certainly
give our position a much more positive aspect. The moves against
corporatism in France, Germany and Italy would be valuable in their
own right. Whether the ERM could for long stand the removal of all
these controls, which helped give it a false stability, was to be seen.
The difficulty of Alan’s approach, of course, was that it did not remove
the fundamental objections which both he and I had to the system of
semi-fixed exchange rates which the ERM constituted. But in the end I
knew that Alan’s ingenious suggestion might be the only way in which
I could resist the pressure from Nigel, Geoffrey and the European
Community for early entry.

Leon Brittan — now Vice-President of the European Commission —
came to see me soon afterwards to try to persuade me of the benefits
of ERM membership. He argued that it would give us an important say
in the next steps of economic and monetary co-operation. Indeed, he
said that it would enable Britain to dictate the pace and course of
further progress in this area. He had apparently been reinforced in this
view by a remark made to him by M. Delors over dinner to the effect
that ‘if she joins, she wins.’ I was not, however, overimpressed by the
European Commission President’s table-talk. I said that I did not
believe that those who wanted to advance along the route mapped out
by the Delors Committee on EMU would be deterred from pressing
ahead by British membership of the ERM. And so, of course, it proved.
My relations with Nigel went through another difficult patch in May
when an interview I gave to the World Service came indiscreetly close
to admitting that the reason why our inflation rate had increased was
because we had been shadowing the deutschmark. This, of course, was
true, but it was a departure from the convenient answer that it was

because we cut interest rates in the wake of the ‘Black Monday’ Stock
Market crash and held them down too long that inflation had begun to
rise. Nigel was at a European Finance ministers’ meeting in Spain and
became very upset. So I authorized a line for the press which reverted
to the less accurate but more mutually acceptable explanation. But I
did at this time ask the Treasury to provide me with a paper giving
their explanation as to why inflation had risen. I was subsequently
interested to learn that Nigel had asked that the first draft of this
paper, which had focused almost exclusively on the shadowing of the
ERM, should be revised to extend the analysis to cover the earlier
1985–6 period as well.* Not surprisingly under these circumstances, I
found the finished product less sharp and persuasive than some other
Treasury papers.
There was worse to come. On Wednesday 14 June 1989, just twelve
days before the European Council in Madrid, Geoffrey Howe and Nigel
Lawson mounted an ambush. Geoffrey, I soon learnt, was the moving
force. They sent me a joint minute arguing that in order to strike an
acceptable compromise on the Delors EMU proposals — agreeing to
Stage 1 but with no commitment to Stages 2 and 3 or an InterGovernmental Conference (IGC) — I should say that I would accept a
‘non-legally binding reference’ to sterling joining the ERM by the end
of 1992, provided that certain conditions were fulfilled by then. The
alternative was — as usual — ‘isolation’. It was a typical Foreign
Office paper which Nigel Lawson in his better days would have
scornfully eviscerated.
I had myself, since reading Alan’s earlier paper on the conditions for
entry into the ERM, been giving a great deal of thought to this subject.
It was not clear to me whether spelling out these conditions at this
stage would help deflect the other Community countries and the
Commission from the course towards EMU on which they seemed set. I
was not convinced about the alleged political advantages. I was deeply
concerned about the consequences of setting a specified date for the
currency markets. However, I saw Nigel and Geoffrey on the evening
of Tuesday 20 June to discuss their minute and its contents. At the end
I said that I would reflect further on the way in which this issue should
be handled at Madrid. I remained sceptical whether a concession on
membership of the ERM would really achieve our agreed aim of
blocking an IGC and Stages 2 and 3 of Delors. But this could only be
judged on the spot at Madrid. In any event I remained very wary of
setting a date for sterling’s membership.
I had not liked this way of proceeding — by joint minutes, pressure
and cabals. But I was more than angry about what happened next. I
received a further joint minute. In this Nigel and Geoffrey said that
just spelling out in greater detail the conditions which would have to
be fulfilled before we joined — widening these to include for example
Single Market measures — would be ‘counterproductive’. There must
be a date. And they wanted another meeting before Madrid.

I read their minute on Saturday morning at Chequers and almost
immediately received a telephone call from my office to ask about the
time for a meeting. This was extremely inconvenient. On Sunday
afternoon I was due in Madrid. But they could not be deterred. I could
have seen them late on Saturday night or early on Sunday morning at
No. 10. They chose the latter.
I knew that Geoffrey had put Nigel up to this. He had been in a
great state about the European election campaign which had not gone
well for us. I knew that he had always thought that he might one day
become Leader of the Conservative Party and Prime Minister — an
ambition which became more passionate as it was slipping away from
him. He considered himself — with some justice — as an important
contributor to our past successes. This quiet, gentle, but deeply
ambitious man — with whom my relations had become progressively
worse as my exasperation at his insatiable appetite for compromise led
me sometimes to lash out at him in front of others — was now out to
make trouble for me if he possibly could. Above all, I suspect, he
thought that he had become indispensable — a dangerous illusion for
a politician. There is no other explanation for what he now did and
put Nigel up to doing.
Geoffrey and Nigel came to see me at 8.15 on Sunday morning, as
arranged. They were shown into my study and sat down facing me on
the other side of the fireplace. They had clearly worked out precisely
what they were to say. Geoffrey began. He urged that I should speak
first at the Madrid Council setting out the conditions on which I would
have sterling join and announcing a date for entry into the ERM. He
and Nigel even insisted on the precise formula, which I took down: ‘It
is our firm intention to join not later than — ’ (a date to be specified).
They said that if I did this I would stop the whole Delors process from
going to Stages 2 and 3. And if I did not agree to their terms and their
formulation they would both resign.
Whether I could have withstood the loss of both my Foreign
Secretary and my Chancellor at the same time in this way I am not
sure. But three things jostled together in my mind. First, I was not
prepared to be blackmailed into a policy which I felt was wrong.
Second, I must keep them on board if I could, at least for the moment.
Third, I would never, never allow this to happen again. But this third
reflection I pushed for the moment to the back of my mind. I told
them that I already had a paragraph spelling out in more detail the
conditions under which sterling could enter the ERM and I would be
using this in my opening speech. But I refused to give them any
undertaking that I would set a date. Indeed, I told them that I could
not believe that a Chancellor and a former Chancellor could seriously
argue that I should set a date in advance: it would be a field day for
the speculators, as they should have known. I said that I would reflect
further on what to say at Madrid. They left, Geoffrey looking
insufferably smug. And so the nasty little meeting ended.

I shall explain shortly the rest of what happened at the Madrid
Council. Suffice it to say here that on the basis of what Alan had
already suggested and with some modification I spelt out what became
known as the ‘Madrid conditions’ for sterling’s entry into the ERM. I
reaffirmed our intention to join once inflation was down and there was
satisfactory implementation of the first phase of the Delors Report,
including free movement of capital and abolition of foreign exchange
controls. But I did not set a date for entry, nor was I put under any
pressure at Madrid to do so.
I do not believe that spelling out the Madrid conditions significantly
modified the pace, let alone the direction, of discussions on the Delors
report on EMU. Only someone with a peculiarly naïve view of the
world — the sort cultivated by British Euro-enthusiasts but without
any equivalent among hard-headed continental Euro-opportunists —
could have imagined that it would. In fact, though, the Madrid
conditions did allow me to rally the Conservative Party around our
negotiating position and got us away from the tired and faintly
ridiculous formula of ‘when the time was right’. The outcome of
Madrid was widely praised back at home. Unfortunately, in a sense the
time would never be ‘right’ — because the ERM, particularly now that
the Delors objective of EMU had come out into the open, would never
be ‘right’. But that was something I could do little about.
Back home, Cabinet began as usual at 10.30 on Thursday 29 June.
Normally, I would sit at my place with my back to the door as Cabinet
ministers trooped in. This time, however, I stood in the doorway —
waiting. But there were no resignations. The condition that there must
be a date for our joining the ERM might never have been mentioned.
Nigel Lawson even managed the remark that Madrid had gone rather
well, hadn’t it. He certainly had a nerve, I thought: but then Nigel
always did. That was one of his engaging characteristics.
MORE TENSION WITH NIGEL LAWSON
It was from this time that tension between myself and Nigel Lawson
arose over the independent economic advice that I was receiving from
Alan Walters. Alan had returned to No. 10 in May 1989. I have already
described his contribution to the ‘Madrid conditions’ for ERM entry.
While the Treasury, thoroughly alarmed by the inflationary effects of
Nigel’s policy of shadowing the ERM, kept urging ever higher interest
rates, Alan now drew my attention to the danger that excessively high
interest rates might drive the economy into recession.* He was, in
short, doing precisely what a prime minister’s adviser should. He also
had the merit of being right.
However, during his five-year absence from No. 10, he had been
asked to give his views in all sorts of different fora; and Alan’s views
were always trenchant. Various reports, articles and lectures

containing his thoughts about economic policy issues in general and
the ERM in particular kept on surfacing. Partly because these were
exploited by the press to point up divisions between Nigel and me and
partly because Nigel himself, knowing that he was being blamed for
the return of inflation, was becoming hypersensitive, they became a
major problem.
The important point, however, was that all this press speculation
reflected an underlying reality. This was that Nigel and I no longer
had that broad identity of views or mutual trust which a Chancellor
and prime minister should. Nor was there any way — short of a full
and totally uncharacteristic mea culpa on his part — that
commentators were not going to hold Nigel to blame for the
worsening economic outlook.
All of this was evident at the 1989 Party Conference — for which
with greater optimism than caution the new Party Chairman, Ken
Baker, had chosen the theme ‘the Right Team’. A German rise in
interest rates had led us to follow suit and we took the unpalatable
decision to raise them to 15 per cent on the eve of the conference. The
Daily Mail duly savaged Nigel as ‘this bankrupt Chancellor’ and
demanded that he go. Nigel, who never lacked courage, gave a robust
and successful speech. But even now the two of us had to negotiate the
wording of his and my references to the exchange rate. There was a
clear difference of emphasis — if no open contradiction — between his
formulation:
The Conservative Party never has been, and never will be, the party of
devaluation.

– a statement which implied that it was in our hands what the
ultimate value of the pound in the exchange markets would be, and
my own:
As Nigel Lawson made clear yesterday, industry must not expect to find
refuge in a perpetually depreciating currency.

– a rather different point, based on a quite different economic
analysis.
We survived the conference without mishap. But there was a general
feeling in the press that with more unpleasant economic news to come
it would be difficult for Nigel to continue. If he sought to do so, he
would have my backing and indeed protection, as he always had.
However convenient it might have been, I was not going to throw him
to the wolves. Perhaps slightly less charitably, I felt that since he had
got us into this inflation he should face up to the unpopular
requirements for getting us out of it. It would, after all, be a highly
unpalatable prospect for a new, incoming Chancellor. In any case —
for reasons and in circumstances I shall describe shortly — I had made
what I intended to be the last major reshuffle of this Parliament,
moving Geoffrey Howe from the Foreign Office to be Leader of the

House. I had decided — rightly or wrongly — that Nigel should stay.
But what had Nigel himself decided?
NIGEL LAWSON’S RESIGNATION
I have already mentioned the stir which Alan Walters’s comments,
dragged out of the past and often torn out of context, created.
Moreover, since the timing was quite unpredictable — it depended on
how quickly journalists tracked down and republished past comments
— there was very little my staff or Alan could do about it. The
Financial Times published on 18 October an article in which Alan was
quoted, among other things, as describing the ERM as ‘half-baked’.
This article was based on an essay to be published in the American
Economist. But what the FT did not say was that the latter was written
by Alan in 1988, long before he returned as my economic adviser. I
felt that he had nothing to apologize for and minuted:
As the article was written well before Madrid (in which Alan also advised), I
don’t see the difficulty. Moreover, advisers ADVISE, ministers decide policy.

At 4.30 in the morning on Wednesday 25 October the VC10 which
brought me back from the Commonwealth Conference at Kuala
Lumpur arrived at Heathrow. Back at No. 10 I sorted out my personal
belongings, discussed my diary with Amanda Ponsonby (my
indispensable diary secretary), had lunch in the flat and then saw
Nigel Lawson for one of our regular bilaterals. He was exercised about
Alan Walters, having been repeatedly questioned in interviews about
whether Alan should be sacked. But there were many other things we
had to think about. In particular, we had to agree the line which Nigel
would take at the forthcoming meeting of European Community
Finance ministers on EMU. Nigel had devised an ingenious alternative
approach, based on Friedrich Hayek’s idea of competing currencies, in
which the market rather than governments would provide the
momentum for monetary union. (Unfortunately, this proposal did not
in fact get very far, not least because it was not at all in the statist,
centralist model which our European Community partners preferred.)
After seeing Nigel, I held a wider discussion of EMU which also
included John Major (Foreign Secretary) and Nick Ridley (Trade and
Industry Secretary) at which we endorsed Nigel’s proposed approach
in his paper, while accepting that its purpose was mainly tactical in
order to slow down discussion of EMU within the Community.
The next day, Thursday, was bound to hold its difficulties. But I did
not know at this stage how many. Not only were there Prime
Minister’s Questions: I also had to make a statement and answer
questions on the outcome of the Kuala Lumpur CHOGM and,
inevitably, on South Africa. I was under the hairdryer shortly after 8
o’clock in the morning when I received a message from my Private
Office via Crawfie that Nigel Lawson wanted to see me at 8.50, that is

just before I began my regular briefing session for Parliamentary
Questions. Crawfie said something to me about it all being quite
serious and that Nigel might be going to resign. But I said: ‘Oh no
dear, you’ve got it all wrong. He’s going to Germany this afternoon for
a meeting and I expect he wants to see me about that.’ So when I came
downstairs to see Nigel in my study I was quite unprepared for what
he had to say. He told me that either Alan Walters must go or he —
Nigel — would resign. He wanted me to agree there and then to his
demand.
At first I could hardly take him seriously. I told him not to be
ridiculous. He was holder of a great office of state. He was demeaning
himself even by talking in such terms. As for Alan, he was a devoted
and loyal member of my staff who had given me frank and good
advice but had always acted within the proprieties. If others, including
the media, had attempted to exploit and exaggerate legitimate
differences of opinion, that was no responsibility of his. There was no
question of my sacking him. The meeting ended inconclusively. I asked
Nigel to think again. I thought he accepted this advice. But there was
little time to talk since I had to discuss the briefing for Parliamentary
Questions and my statement at a meeting due to begin at 9.00 a.m.
An hour later Nigel came into a meeting with other ministers on the
future of the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston. He
seemed on good form and made several acute interventions in the
discussion. I hoped and believed that the storm had blown over. Then
we met again — this time at Cabinet. I opened Cabinet by saying that
we must be business-like and get through the agenda promptly
because two ministers had to leave for meetings in Europe. Nigel was
one of them.
I was, therefore doubly surprised when I was told over the light
lunch — soup and fruit — I used to have on Parliamentary Questions
days that Nigel again wanted to see me. I had thought he was not even
in the country. We again met in my study where he repeated his
demand and said that he wanted to resign. There was nothing much
new I could say and not much time to say it since I had soon to be in
the House of Commons. But I made it clear that Alan Walters was not
going and hoped that Nigel would reflect further. I said that I would
see him after I had finished with Questions and my statement.
Over in my room in the House of Commons I was having a last look
through my briefing when at 3.05 p.m. — a bare ten minutes before I
was due to answer Questions in the House — Andrew Turnbull, my
private secretary, came in to tell me that Nigel Lawson had decided to
resign and that he wanted an announcement out by 3.30 p.m. This was
out of the question. We had not told the Queen. We had no successor
arranged. The London financial markets would still be open. I myself
was about to face an hour on my feet answering questions and making
a statement on the Commonwealth Conference. I repeated that I would
see Nigel some time between 5.00 p.m. and 5.30 p.m. back in No. 10.

I only got through Questions and the Statement by relegating the
crisis of Nigel’s departure to the back of my mind. About an hour later,
on my way out of the Chamber, I asked John Major, who as Foreign
Secretary had been sitting beside me for my Statement, to follow me to
my room: ‘I have a problem.’
Ideally, I would have liked to make Nick Ridley Chancellor. But,
particularly under these difficult circumstances, Nick’s scorn for
presentational niceties might well have compounded the problem.
John Major, who knew the Treasury from his days as Chief Secretary,
looked the obvious choice. I had already thought that John might
succeed me. But I would have liked him to gain more experience. He
had only been at the Foreign Office for a few weeks and had not yet
fully mastered this department, so very different from the Treasury
where he had been an effective and competent Chief Secretary. He
would have liked to stay as Foreign Secretary rather than return to
pick up the pieces after Nigel. When he expressed some reluctance to
go from the Foreign Office to the Treasury, I told him that we all have
to accept second best occasionally. That applied to me just as much as
to him. So he agreed with good grace.
I dashed back to No. 10 to see Nigel, who was still insisting that his
resignation should be announced immediately. On reflection there
seems to me just one explanation for Nigel’s indecent haste. I think
that he feared that I might telephone Alan Walters, who was in
America and quite oblivious to what was happening, and that Alan
would resign. This would have deprived him of the excuse he wanted.
I now told Nigel that John Major was succeeding him. There was
nothing left to discuss and it was a short meeting. I was sorry that our
long and generally fruitful association should end in that way. I then
telephoned Alan to tell him what happened. He told me that Nigel’s
resignation had put him in an impossible situation and so he insisted,
against all my attempts to persuade him, on resigning too.
JOHN MAJOR AS CHANCELLOR
Nigel’s departure was a blow to me — and one which Geoffrey Howe
used to stir up more trouble when, the following weekend, in a speech
of calculated malice, he praised Nigel as a Chancellor of great courage
and insisted on entry into the ERM on the terms outlined at Madrid.
But Nigel’s going was also a boon in one respect. At least in John
Major I had a Chancellor who, though he lacked Nigel’s grasp of
economics, had not got personal capital sunk in past policy errors. He
was psychologically more able to deal with their consequences.
The three main tasks we faced were: first, to bring inflation under
control, though it was important to moderate the pressure in time to
avoid recession; second, to deal with the thorny issue of the ERM,
which had done so much damage to the Government’s unity and

standing; and third, to avoid being sucked into European Economic
and Monetary Union. On the first of these — inflation — it was mainly
a matter of applying the continuing and unpalatable medicine of high
interest rates. It may be that interest rates were kept rather too high
for too long: they had already been 13 per cent or above for a year
and had risen to 15 per cent the previous month. Yet as each month
the forecast inflation figures kept on being revised upwards there was
a general air of uncertainty about what precisely the underlying
position was. We therefore thought it right to err on the side of
financial prudence. John and I had no serious disagreements on this
policy. By October 1990, when I insisted on a 1 per cent cut on
entering the ERM, this was justified on the grounds that the money
supply had turned sharply downwards: the RPI figure too was just on
the turn, after reaching almost 11 per cent — a figure I had never
believed would be reached again while I was Prime Minister.
On the questions of the ERM and EMU, I was increasingly conscious
of dealing with a very different sort of Chancellor than Nigel. John
Major — perhaps because he had made his name as a whip, or perhaps
because he is unexcited by the sort of concepts which people like Nigel
and I saw as central to politics — had one great objective: this was to
keep the Party together. To him that meant that we must enter the
ERM as soon as possible to relieve the political strains. This primacy of
politics over economics — an odd attribute in a Treasury minister —
also meant that John was attracted by a fudge on EMU which would
assuage the anxieties of the timorous Europhiles in the Party that we
would otherwise be ‘isolated’. On ERM, much as I continued to dislike
the system and distrust its purpose, I had agreed the principle at
Madrid subject to the conditions expressed. Eventually, I was to go
along with what John wanted. On EMU, which for me went to the
very heart not just of the debate about Europe’s future but about
Britain’s future as a democratic, sovereign state, I was not prepared to
compromise.
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT ERM AND EMU: 1990
From the spring of 1990 I discussed the ERM with John Major on a
fairly regular basis. When I saw him on the morning of Thursday 29
March I said that I did not believe that the conditions for our
membership had yet been met. Although the issue of the timing of
membership would need to be considered in the run-up to the next
election it would in any event be out of the question to publish a
precise date by which the UK would join. I was glad to find that John
agreed with me. Unlike Geoffrey and Nigel, he realized that to set an
advance date for joining would leave us at the mercy of the markets.
But it was increasingly clear that he still wanted us to join soon. He
said that bearing in mind the likely favourable impact of entry into the
ERM on political sentiment and in turn on sentiment in the markets, it

would be easier to bring interest rates down and maintain a firm
exchange rate if we were inside rather than outside the ERM. That
sounded all too like Nigel’s cracked record to the effect that you
should steer by the exchange rate rather than by the money supply.
Alas, that policy had steered us into inflation. John’s approach was
that if the Party and the Government united around the policy and we
looked like winning the next election, the economic prospect would
improve as well. But I knew full well that whenever you take
economic decisions for political purposes, you run considerable risks.
A few days later I discussed EMU and the Delors Report with John.
He said that he would be minuting me with his conclusions on the best
way forward. He said that the strategy must be to slow down the
advance towards Stages 2 and 3 of Delors and the erosion of national
sovereignty they entailed, but to ensure all the while that the UK was
not excluded from the negotiating process. This had an indiarubber
feel to it. So I said that there were serious dangers if we adopted a
posture which implied that moves beyond ERM membership towards
further economic and monetary integration could be contemplated. If
other member states wanted to take such steps that was up to them.
But the UK would not participate in that process. If we made that
absolutely clear, I thought it was likely that, under pressure from the
Bundesbank, Germany would also decline to move to the next stages
of EMU. I sought to get John to view all this in a wider context and
talked to him about the need to develop free trade relations with the
USA and other countries, pointing out that centrally controlled blocs
of countries — such as a federal Europe looked like being — must not
be allowed to stand in the way of this.
John Major became increasingly worked up about both ERM
membership and EMU. On 9 April 1990 he minuted me that he had
been startled by the determination of other European Community
Finance ministers to agree a treaty for full EMU. He had found little
support for our new alternative approach — a ‘hard ecu’ circulating
alongside existing currencies, managed by a European Monetary Fund
— which we had advanced as an ‘evolutionary approach’ to EMU.* He
therefore set out a number of options as to how we might proceed. Of
these the option which he recommended — and which was ultimately
to be developed further at Maastricht — was to work for a treaty
which gave a full definition of EMU and the institutions necessary for
its final stage (together with any transitional stage, if agreed) but then
allowed an ‘opting-in’ mechanism for member states. This would allow
them to join in the new Stage 3 arrangements — that is the single
currency — at their own pace. He believed that this should be the goal
we should work for as the outcome to the IGC. At a meeting with me
on Wednesday 18 April, John rehearsed the arguments of his paper,
emphasizing that the goal of full EMU as described by Delors was
shared by all except the United Kingdom.

I agreed neither with John’s analysis nor his conclusion. I said that
the Government could not subscribe to a treaty amendment containing
the full Delors definition of EMU. Further work should be done to
develop our proposal for a European Monetary Fund which we could
put forward as the most that it was necessary for the Community to
agree upon for now. I was extremely disturbed to find that the
Chancellor had swallowed so quickly the slogans of the European
lobby. At this point, however, I felt that I should hold my fire. John
was new to the job. He was right to be searching for a way forward
which would attract allies in Europe as well as convince Conservative
MPs of our reasonableness. But it was already clear that he was
thinking in terms of compromises which would not be acceptable to
me and that intellectually he was drifting with the tide.
ENTRY OF STERLING INTO THE ERM
In tandem with consideration of tactics for EMU went consideration of
timing for the ERM. The Treasury drew up a note for me about the
best time for sterling to join, bearing in mind economic circumstances
and political events. Although the other countries and central banks
were pressing for our membership there would still be an established
procedure to go through. So it was assumed that we would announce
our intentions on a Friday so as to leave the weekend for the details to
be settled before markets opened on Monday. There would have to be
an initial discussion of the details between Finance Ministry and
Central Bank representatives in the EC Monetary Committee: the
possibility of a full meeting of EC Finance ministers and governors in
person had also to be allowed for, though in practice this proved
unnecessary. After timing, the two most important questions were
with what width of ‘band’ (that is how much leeway would there be
above and below the central parity chosen) and at what rate sterling
should join. Of course, both these points received very close attention
from me and the Treasury. Earlier hypothetical discussions had taken
place on the basis of a narrow (+ or — 2.25 per cent) band; but John
and I now believed that the wider (+ or — 6 per cent) band would be
better, giving greater room for manoeuvre.
As for the central rate of sterling against the deutschmark, this was
influenced by several factors. First, the rate chosen had to be credible
in the light of recent exchange rate movements. Second, it should not
be so low that it weakened the fight against inflation, by requiring
imprudently low interest rates to keep sterling down. Third, and by
contrast, it must not be so high that it imposed unnecessary pressure
on industry, both through high interest rates which made borrowing
expensive and a high exchange rate which made our goods
uncompetitive.
It would, of course, test the wisdom of Solomon to settle on the
‘right’ rate: indeed, I doubt if Solomon in his wisdom would ever have

set himself such a task. This is because ultimately there can be no
‘right’ level of sterling apart from what the market says it is. To search
for such a thing is in a sense to fall into the trap of believing in the old
precapitalist concept of a ‘just price’. Had Nigel Lawson managed to
persuade me to have sterling enter the ERM in November 1985 the
sterling/deutschmark rate would have been about DM3.75. A year
later the pound was down to DM2.88. In November 1987 it was up to
DM2.98. In November 1988 it was right up to DM3.16. In November
1989 it was back down to DM2.87. When we entered it was at a
central parity of DM2.95, which was the rate at which the London
market closed that day. What this shows on even a cursory glance is
that revaluations and/or heavy intervention and very large shifts in
interest rates would have been necessary to keep sterling in the
mechanism throughout this period. It is, in fact, a demonstration that
Alan Walters had been right all along in his view that the ERM
ensured not stability, but rather the kind of instability which comes
from movement in large leaps rather than by the more gradual
accommodation of the market.
Only at my meeting with John Major on Wednesday 13 June did I
eventually say that I would not resist sterling joining the ERM. But the
timing was for debate. Although the terms I had laid down had not
been fully met, I had too few allies to continue to resist and win the
day. There are limits to the ability of even the most determined
democratic leader to stand out against what the Cabinet, the
Parliamentary Party, the industrial lobby and the press demand —
particularly when you have lived for so long, as I had, with a
thoroughly unsatisfactory form of words (‘joining when the time is
right’), since qualified further by the Madrid conditions. By this stage
all my advisers were telling me — though on political rather than
economic grounds — that I should have sterling enter. Almost my only
ally in the Cabinet was Nick Ridley — who was shortly to resign:
together we were not a strong enough combination to have done what
we would have had to do — that is to state that on grounds of
principle we would not have sterling enter the ERM now or in the
future.
But my willingness to join the ERM was qualified by a crucial
condition. I was not prepared to keep to any particular parity at the
expense of domestic monetary conditions. I insisted that we enter the
wide band — 6 per cent on either side. Even then I made it very clear
to John Major that if sterling came under pressure, I was not going to
use massive intervention, either pouring in pounds and cutting interest
rates to keep sterling down or raising interest rates to damaging levels
and using precious reserves to keep sterling up. For me, willingness to
realign within the ERM — as other countries had done — if
circumstances warranted it, was the essential condition for entry. This
makes nonsense of the claim, sometimes heard from ERM proponents
justifying the subsequent collapse, that we were right to go in, but

wrong to do so at that rate. In fact, a rate that is right today can be
wrong tomorrow and vice versa. Until now, the ERM had never been a
rigid system. I did not need to spell this out to our European partners
because, whatever the fine points of detail, a country which wished to
realign had always been able to do so in practice. Now that the UK
was inside the ERM, other countries would have been so anxious to
keep us in that they would have made little or no difficulty about
realignment.
With the publication of the Delors Report, however, the Europeans
began to regard the ERM as part of the move towards locking
currencies, leading to a single currency. Accordingly, devaluations
were more frowned upon than they had been. But they still occurred
and would have to occur as long as we insisted on them. It was only
when my successor went along with the objective of EMU as spelt out
in the Maastricht Treaty and made it clear that sterling would enter
the narrow band of the ERM that the pressure never to revalue
‘growed and growed’ until it became an overriding dogma. I had not
the slightest doubt that if the ERM ever developed in the rigid way in
which I knew many other European governments and the Commission
would have liked, it would prove unworkable and would break up. I
never envisaged that a Conservative government would talk itself into
the trap of regarding a particular parity for sterling as the touchstone
of its economic policy and indeed its political credibility.
I resisted John Major’s wish to go into the ERM in July. The
monetary signals, indicating that inflation was starting to turn down
so that we could enter the ERM with some confidence that the parity
could be sustained, were not yet in place.
By the autumn, however, the high interest rates were clearly doing
their work. The money supply fell sharply. It was clear that interest
rates should now be reduced, quite apart from the question of the
ERM. As regards ERM entry, the Madrid conditions had not been fully
met. But the most important consideration was inflation. It was not till
the end of the year that inflation as measured by the RPI (heavily
distorted by mortgage interest rates and the way the community
charge figured in it) began to fall. Other indicators, however, — CBI
surveys, car sales, retail sales and above all the money supply —
showed that we were getting on top of inflation. I insisted against the
Treasury and the Bank on a simultaneous announcement of a 1 per
cent cut in interest rates. They had not disputed that the monetary and
other figures warranted this; but they had wanted to delay. But I for
my part was determined to demonstrate that we would be looking
more to monetary conditions than to the exchange rate in setting
interest rates. So on Friday 5 October we announced that we were
seeking entry into the ERM, and I placed heavy emphasis on the
interest rate cut and the reasons for it in presenting that day’s
decision.

NO COMPROMISE WITH EMU
As I have explained, the attitude taken by Britain and the rest of the
Community to EMU had a bearing on the operation and development
of the ERM. But, of course, EMU was a far greater question. The sense
that I had had at my meeting with John Major in April that he was
going wobbly on this increased when I received a further paper from
him a little later, at the end of May. John’s paper contained all the
now familiar phrases about the prospect of a ‘two-tier Europe’ — on
which I noted ‘What’s wrong with that if the other tier is going in the
wrong direction?’ — and the awful possibility of the other eleven
negotiating a separate treaty for EMU — on which I wrote, ‘So be it.
Germany and France would have to pay all the regional subventions
— OR there would be NONE in which case the poorer nations could
NOT agree.’ Quite apart from this tendency to be defeated by
platitudes, which I found disturbing, it did not seem to me that John,
who prided himself on his tactical political sense, had thought through
the implications for the rest of the Community countries if they had to
go ahead without us.
So at our meeting on the evening of Thursday 31 May I tried to
stiffen John’s resolve and widen his vision. He reiterated his concern
that we would find ourselves ‘isolated’ in the run up to a general
election. He argued that to avoid this we should agree to a treaty
amendment establishing the aim of full EMU, but insist on an ‘optingin’ provision which left it to individual member states whether and
when to join. I rejected this. I said that it was psychologically wrong to
put ourselves in a frame of mind in which we accepted the
inevitability of moves towards EMU rather than attacking the whole
concept. We had arguments which might persuade both the Germans
— who would be worried about the weakening of anti-inflation
policies — and the poorer countries — who must be told that they
would not be bailed out of the consequences of a single currency,
which would therefore devastate their inefficient economies. I said
that I did not regard John’s proposed ‘opting-in’ mechanism as an
adequate defence against being drawn into full EMU. The same
reasoning which led him now to argue that we had no alternative but
to accept the treaty objective of full EMU would be employed later to
concede that we could not afford to be left out of the move to a single
currency either. So accepting the opting-in mechanism now would be
tantamount to joining eventually and I was not prepared to make that
commitment.
We had to use the time between now and the IGC in December to
try to undermine the will of the other states to move to Stage 3 of the
Delors Report and to develop a wider vision of the way ahead. I
rehearsed once again my objection to the establishment of tight blocs
of countries which stood in the way of a wider internationalism. I said

that we must build on the American proposals for strengthening the
political aspects of NATO, by suggesting a trade dimension to the
alliance which would join Europe to a North American (US and
Canada) Free Trade Area. I saw this as a way of averting the
dangerous prospect of a world divided into three protectionist trading
blocs, based on the European Community, Japan and the United
States, which over time could become seriously unstable. I also
suggested that we look at an idea on which Alan Walters had been
working — a system of linking currencies to an objective reference
standard, such as a commodity index, which would work
automatically, without the bureaucratic paraphernalia and the
intrusive federalism of the Delors proposals. Such a system might
include both the dollar and the yen. I said that we had to set out our
ideas boldly at international summits, emphasizing that we were going
beyond the narrow European goals and were much more in tune with
wider political developments. I was aware that this was visionary stuff:
but if there was ever a time for vision this was it. So I had the
Treasury and the Foreign Office work up these ideas, which without
noticeable enthusiasm they did.
I felt that, much as I liked John Major and valued his loyalty, we
had to bring others who were more at ease with large ideas and
strategies into the discussion. So — as well as Douglas Hurd, who as
Foreign Secretary was necessarily involved, for EMU was by now at
the centre of debate in the European Council — I brought in Nick
Ridley. I asked Nick to prepare a paper on EMU and the alternatives
and he attended my meeting with John and Douglas on the morning of
Tuesday 19 June before the forthcoming Dublin European Council.
Nick made two contributions of great importance to the concept of an
alternative Europe, going in a direction different from that of the
inward-looking, statist and protectionist Europe with which we were
faced. The first was to stress that the Delors-style Europe with a single
currency would obstruct the enlargement of the Community. Our own
vision of a wider, freer, more flexible Europe would be much more
accommodating to the countries of the post-communist world. The
second observation Nick made was to point out that we should not be
alarmed by some countries going ahead with EMU and leaving us out:
indeed, this was a model we should encourage — a wider Community
in which different countries came together for different purposes on
different occasions.
At this point it makes sense to consider how matters had been
developing within the European Community itself and the stance we
took in the face of the drive for federalism which was underway. But if
there is one lesson which is to be learnt from the economic
developments of the period of 1987 to 1990 — confirmed since by the
circumstances preceding Britain’s undignified departure from the ERM
in 1992 — it is that contained in the phrase I used in the House of
Commons, which so infuriated Nigel and summed up the difference

between us: ‘there is no way in which one can buck the market.’ I
might add that if you try to do so, the market will buck you. The belief
that the laws of economics and the judgements of the markets can be
suspended by clever people — and Nigel Lawson was one of the
cleverest people in British politics — is a perpetual temptation to folly.
That folly cost us dear. But then the idea that other clever people —
and Jacques Delors was one of the cleverest people I met in European
politics — can build their Tower of Babel on the uneven foundation of
ancient nations, different languages and diverse economies is still
more dangerous. Work on that shaky construction is still proceeding.
*

See pp. 96–7.

Overfunding was the practice by which the Government sought to reduce private
bank deposits — and hence £M3 — by selling greater amounts of public debt than
were required merely to finance its own deficit. The ‘bill mountain’ arose from the use
of the proceeds to buy back treasury bills from the market.
*

*

See p. 706.

In all this, it is always necessary to distinguish between nominal and real interest
rates. High money interest rates are predominantly a consequence of the market’s
expectations of high inflation. If inflation is expected to be high, say at 10 per cent,
then, even if one ignores taxes, interest rates of 10 per cent are required just to offset
the inflationary erosion of a family’s savings. In fact it is real interest rates — the
excess of the percentage interest rate above the expected inflation — which affects the
thrift and investment of families and businesses.
*

*

For this and for the Madrid European Council see pp. 740–2, 750–2.

The suggestion that the inflation which began at the end of 1988 and lasted until
mid-1991 could be explained by decisions on interest rates and monetary policy in
1985 assumed almost a four-year lag in the effect of monetary expansion on inflation.
We know that lags, in Milton Friedman’s words, are ‘long and variable’ with an
average of about eighteen months. So three to four years is possible, but hardly
plausible.
*

Interest rates had gone up to 13 per cent in November 1988 and to 14 per cent in
May 1989.
*

Following the negative reception accorded to our original proposal for competing
currencies, we began to develop this new hard ecu approach based on the suggestions
made by Sir Michael Butler, Britain’s former Ambassador to the Community, now
working in the City.
*

CHAPTER XXV

The Babel Express
Relations with the European Community — 1987–1990

I have already described how during my second term of office as
Prime Minister certain harmful features and tendencies in the
European Community started to become evident. Against the notable
gains constituted by the securing of Britain’s budget rebate and
progress towards a real Common — or ‘Single’ — Market had to be set
a more powerful Commission ambitious for power, an inclination
towards bureaucratic rather than market solutions to economic
problems and the re-emergence of a Franco-German axis with its own
covert federalist and protectionist agenda. As yet, however, the full
implications of all this were unclear — even to me, distrustful as I
always was of that un-British combination of high-flown rhetoric and
pork-barrel politics which passed for European statesmanship.
Indeed, the first three European Councils of my second term were
very much of the traditional mould, dominated by finance and
agriculture: and their outcome was equally traditional — a British
victory on points. But from then on the Community environment in
which I had to operate became increasingly alien and frequently
poisonous. The disputes were no longer about tactical or temporary
issues but about the whole future direction of the Community and its
relations with the wider world changing so fast outside it. The FrancoGerman axis became more evident; and with the unification of
Germany that relationship became still more lop-sided, with German
dominance increasingly pronounced.
The Franco-German federalist project was wholeheartedly supported
by a variety of different elements within the Community — by poorer
southern countries who expected a substantial pay-off in exchange for
its accomplishment; by northern businesses which hoped to foist their
own high costs on to their competitors; by socialists because of the
scope it offered for state intervention; by Christian Democrats whose
political tradition was firmly corporatist; and, of course, by the
Commission which saw itself as the nucleus of a supranational
government. In the face of these powerful forces I sought for allies
within the Community and sometimes found them; and so my strategic
retreat in the face of majorities I could not block was also punctuated
by tactical victories.
Ultimately, however, there was no option but to stake out a
radically different position from the direction in which most of the
Community seemed intent on going, to raise the flag of national
sovereignty, free trade and free enterprise — and fight. Isolated I

might be in the European Community — but taking the wider
perspective, the federalists were the real isolationists, clinging grimly
to a half-Europe when Europe as a whole was being liberated; toying
with protectionism when truly global markets were emerging;
obsessed with schemes of centralization when the greatest attempt at
centralization — the Soviet Union — was on the point of collapse. If
there was ever an idea whose time had come and gone it was surely
that of the artificial mega-state. I was, therefore, convinced not just
that I was right about the way forward for Europe, but confident that
if the Government and Party I led kept their nerve we would be
vindicated by intellectual developments and international events.
FINANCE AND FARMING
After the 1987 general election I was in just the mood to force the
Community to live up to its previous protestations of virtue. For all the
talk of financial rectitude at and since the Fontainebleau Council of
1984, there had still been no effective budget discipline and no
binding limits on spending under the CAP. The rebate I had won had
limited our net contribution from rising to a totally unacceptable level;
but several of our Community partners now wanted to cut or eliminate
it. There was a large Community budget deficit which was starting to
concentrate minds. But from the Commission it had provoked the
traditional answer to any financial problem — an increase in the
Community’s ‘own resources’. They wanted to increase that sum not
just to the 1.6 per cent of VAT which we had agreed at Fontainebleau
might happen in 1988, but to 1.4 per cent of Community countries’
GNP (equivalent to 2.2 per cent of VAT receipts). There was also on
the table a pretty blatantly protectionist proposal, strongly supported
by the French, for an Oils and Fats tax. This was, it is true, to be
matched by measures to control spending on agriculture where huge
sums were going on storing and disposing of surpluses, and to improve
budget discipline. But these were not tough enough. Moreover, the
Commission was still trying to whittle away at what I had secured at
Fontainebleau by proposing to change our rebate mechanism. And M.
Delors also wanted to double the structural funds (that is, spending on
Community regional and social policy). This last proposal was,
naturally, more than welcome to the southern member states and
Ireland which expected to gain most from it.
Who were my allies? However unreliable the French and Germans
would be when it came to cutting agricultural spending on which their
politically influential farmers depended, I knew that at least I could
look to them for support in trying to resist the huge increase in
structural funds. I also had in M. Chirac, the Gaullist French Prime
Minister, an ally in resisting the large increase proposed in ‘own
resources’. But my main allies — though inclined to be critical of our
rebate — were the Dutch. Such then was the technically and

politically complicated scene which I knew confronted me when I
went to Brussels for the European Council meeting on Tuesday 29 and
Wednesday 30 June 1987.
It was an intensely hot, humid day when I arrived. On the way from
the airport, my car was pelted with water balloons by the less
dangerous Euro-fanatics outside the Council. Inside, the possibilities of
bad-tempered disagreement were maximized by the weak
chairmanship of M. Martens, the Belgian Prime Minister and Council
President. He allowed no less than four hours of discussion of the
proposed Oils and Fats tax, which the Germans, the Dutch and I had
not the slightest intention of accepting.
Generally, I was among the best briefed heads of government on
these occasions — partly because I always did my homework and
partly because I had a truly superb official team to help me. Perhaps
the mainstay of this was David Williamson, who came from the
Ministry of Agriculture to the key European policy role in the Cabinet
Office and finally — and deservedly — became Secretary-General of
the Commission. The intricacies of European Community policy,
particularly finance, really test one’s intellectual ability and capacity
for clear thinking. With the exception of those of the presidency, the
different delegations’ officials were not present during the proceedings
themselves; so the Foreign Secretary of the day wrote manuscript
notes which were passed out to our people, against which the
conclusions recorded by the presidency would be checked.
On this occasion (and at Copenhagen later) the complexity of some
of the matters under discussion was absurd. They should have been
dealt with by Agriculture or Finance or Foreign ministers: but there
never seemed the will to take real decisions at this level and so heads
of government would be left discussing matters which would boggle
the mind of the City’s top accountants.
The general view was that this first Brussels Council was a ‘failure’
and that I was responsible for it. There was only a little truth in either
proposition. It was in any case unreasonable to think that with such a
large number of contentious and complicated matters on the agenda
agreement would be reached on the first serious attempt. Moreover, a
good deal of progress was made on the key questions of finance and
agriculture. It was accepted that budget discipline should be ‘binding
and effective’, that it should apply to ‘commitments’ (that is basically
what the Agriculture ministers agreed to spend) as well as actual
payments, and that additional regulations (that is Community ‘laws’)
would be adopted to keep the level of spending within the budget. The
worst aspect — unacceptable to me — was that they wanted to build
into the ‘agricultural guideline’ — that is the total permitted spending
on agriculture — the present level of overspending. The package as a
whole was not sufficiently tight for me to agree to an increase in ‘own
resources’. So the other heads of government left Brussels aware that I
had lost none of my willingness to say no.

I met two of the key players in Berlin in September, where I was
attending the IDU Conference. I had a working breakfast with M.
Chirac at the British Ambassador’s residence. Not for nothing was he
known by his compatriots as ‘le bulldozer’: and on more than one
occasion I had to make it clear that the lady was not for bulldozing.
He was a marked contrast to President Mitterrand. M. Chirac was
blunt, direct, forceful, argumentative, had a sure grasp of detail and a
profound interest in economics. The President was quieter, more
urbane, a self-conscious French intellectual, fascinated by foreign
policy, bored by detail, possibly contemptuous of economics. Oddly
enough I liked both of them.
M. Chirac had apparently chastised me as a ‘housewife’ in Brussels
in June 1987 and was to make an unprintable remark about me in a
heated exchange at Brussels in February 1988. But I generally found
him somewhat easier to deal with than President Mitterrand, because
he said what he thought and because his public actions bore a greater
similarity to his privately expressed views. I was, as M. Chirac knew,
none too happy about the arrangements which led to the release of
French hostages from the Lebanon and which were widely considered
to have overstepped the mark as regards the principle of refusal to
deal with terrorists. (M. Chirac furiously reproached me at a reception
at the Copenhagen Council for allegedly leaking criticism of what the
French had done: in fact I could lay my hand on my heart and assure
him that we had done no such thing.) To be fair, the French had been
of great assistance to us in the matter of intercepting the arms
shipment from the Eksund* And of course M. Chirac and I were very
much on the same wave-length politically. He had done much to make
the Gaullists (the RPR — Rassemblement pour la République) into a
modern right-of-centre party, committed to free enterprise. This was of
great significance not just to France but in the long term to Europe
and the western alliance. I was disappointed, though not very
surprised, at the way in which the wily President Mitterrand managed
to turn the process of ‘cohabitation’ against the Right. At this time,
though, it was the imminence of the French elections rather than their
likely outcome which was the problem. For it was clear to me that
neither M. Chirac nor President Mitterrand would be anxious to be
seen taking tough action on agriculture when French farmers’ votes
would soon be needed.
Nor for that matter would Chancellor Kohl whom I saw for tea that
afternoon in the German government guesthouse. He confessed to me
that he too had had his domestic political difficulties. His farming
supporters had stayed away from the polls in two recent Land
elections which had led to bad results for the CDU. The small farmer
was, he said, a great element of stability in Germany. He said he was
prepared to make some sacrifices but it would take four or five years
to ‘get over the hill’. I retorted that we did not have four or five years.
We must act on agricultural overspending now. But I did not come

away from the meeting any more optimistic about the likely outcome
of the next Council.
It was too much to expect, when I landed at an icy Copenhagen on
Thursday 4 December, that the papers would not be full of allusions to
the famous battle of Copenhagen, when Nelson, ignoring signalled
orders by the device of holding a telescope to his blind eye, attacked
and blew the opposing fleet out of the water. In fact, as at Brussels
earlier, it was a magnifying glass — or perhaps a pocket calculator —
which were most in order on this occasion, such was the complexity of
the matters under discussion. At least we had the amiable Poul
Schluter, the Conservative Danish Prime Minister, in the chair. The
Danes were anxious to continue receiving as much as possible from the
CAP. But of all the other Community countries they were the most
anti-federalist. So there was a basic sympathy between us, even if not
always a meeting of minds.
Discussions of the ideas put forward at Brussels had been continuing
in the Agriculture Council and between officials and the Commission.
But since then the pressure had increased to cut back our rebate. The
Danes had unhelpfully brought it back into the limelight in their
‘bidding letter’ inviting heads of government to the Council. There was
also continuing discussion about what should constitute the
Community’s ‘own resources’. But for me everything really hinged —
everything that is apart from the maintenance of our rebate on which I
would not compromise — on the measures to control agriculture
spending. The position here was far from satisfactory. I was still
unhappy about the ‘agricultural guideline’ being proposed. But even
more important was the way in which the Commission’s idea of
applying ‘stabilizers’ was to be put into effect. There were basically
two possible ways of cutting agricultural subsidies. One was to tax
overproduction by means of what — in another piece of Community
jargon — was described as a ‘coresponsibility levy’. This might have a
place, but it was not the best method. The other way was to apply
automatic and cumulative price cuts once a certain level of production
was breached. This was the ‘stabilizer’ mechanism. It then fell to be
discussed what the ‘minimum quantity’ of any particular commodity
would be before the mechanism began to operate — for different
agricultural products would require different formulae according to
the market in which they were being produced — and what the price
cuts should be.
It is also worth adding, however, one other possibility which I never
actually advanced as an alternative to either of these routes but which
from time to time I considered. This was to revert to a national system
of subsidy for agriculture, thus bypassing the whole cumbersome
Community apparatus altogether. It would, of course, have required a
complete rethink of the regime imposed by the Community and could
only have been possible if other countries had wanted to pursue the
same approach. The disadvantage would have been that individual

countries would have been competing in subsidy and probably our
farmers would have lost out in that race to the French and Germans. It
would only have been desirable if agriculture had been brought
effectively under the GATT — and the difficulty of doing that was to
become increasingly evident. But I was definitely attracted to a
scheme by which each nation took financial responsibility for writing
off surplus agricultural stocks and proposed this, without much
success. I also raised with Helmut Kohl, when I saw him just before
the Copenhagen Council, whether it might not be better if Germany
used nationally financed aids to assist her small farmers — though
these must not be used to finance increased production. (I recalled, of
course, how he had essentially adopted this approach at an earlier
Council.)* But though he took the point nothing came of it. I realized
that the only immediate way to rein in Community spending on
agriculture was within a Community framework.
My pre-Council meeting with Chancellor Kohl also revealed him to
be even more preoccupied than before with his farming vote. He
wanted a Community-financed ‘set-aside’ scheme, by which farmers
would essentially be paid not to farm efficiently — something which
ultimately demonstrated the Mad Hatter economics of the CAP. I was
prepared to agree to this, as I told him, as long as we got effective
stabilizers as well. I was also very tough with him about the prospect
of increases in the Community’s ‘own resources’, on which I knew
Chancellor Kohl was willing to see a large increase (ultimately at the
expense of the German taxpayer) in order to keep his farmers happy.
So by the time the Council opened we knew where we stood.
Once it was clear that the French — principally for electoral reasons
— were prepared to back the Germans on a formula for stabilizers
which could not conceivably contain agriculture spending, it was
evident that no satisfactory conclusion could be reached. Neither I nor
Mr Lubbers of the Netherlands would agree to anything on these lines.
The Commission added another split by pressing hard for a doubling
of the structural funds, which pitted the northern against the southern
Europeans. But it was not an acrimonious occasion. It was agreed that
a special European Council would be held in Brussels the following
February.
There were a number of long faces at the end of the Copenhagen
Council. But mine was not among them. I knew that little by little I
was winning the argument inside and outside the Council for the kind
of solution I wanted. I told the other heads of government to cheer up
and reminded them — with a little irony, for I suspected that some of
them needed no reminding — of how difficult things had been at
Brussels on the eve of the Fontainebleau summit and then how at the
next moment what was insoluble suddenly seemed easy. Why should it
not happen again in Brussels? President Mitterrand observed wryly
that he was really not quite sure whether it was easier to deal with
Madame Thatcher when she was difficult or when she was cheerful.

Evidently he did remember.
But it was by no means certain that we would reach agreement at
the forthcoming special European Council. I was prepared to make
some compromises; after all, the question of precisely when and how
agricultural stabilizers would bite was the sort of matter even people
intent on checking agricultural spending could legitimately disagree
about. But far more difficult to gauge was whether Messrs Mitterrand
and Chirac and Herr Kohl would think it worth their while achieving a
settlement on terms which some of their farmers would find
unpalatable.
By now the French election campaigns were in full swing and the
rivalry between President and Prime Minister was intense, with
‘cohabitation’ nothing more than a fiction. Accordingly, when they
arrived in London for an Anglo-French summit on Friday 29 January
1988, the important discussions I had with President Mitterrand and
Prime Minister Chirac had to be at separate meetings. The contrast
between their respective styles was once again evident. President
Mitterrand was not in good form and had a heavy cold, which I hoped
he would not pass on to me: I seem to have an unfailing ability to
attract any passing cold germ. Nor was he properly briefed about the
difficult European Community matters on which I wanted to
concentrate and he had to break off half way through to receive
explanations from Jacques Attali, his adviser. He was obviously
relieved when the conversation turned to defence and foreign affairs. I
was not sure that I had got very far by the end of the discussion,
though as always it had been agreeable enough.
The same could not, however, be said of my meeting with M.
Chirac, who was in robust form. He began very frankly, saying that
with the presidential elections just three months away he had a real
political problem with the forthcoming Council. His own interest, he
said, lay in a failure at Brussels. But for wider international reasons he
was prepared to work for success. Lest I conclude that this meant he
was going to be a push-over, he spelt out for me precisely what his
strategy was. He said that we could either settle at Brussels or wait
until the financial pressure built up on the Community because of its
lack of money. But in that case we would be under the Greek
presidency, which he was certainly right in describing as offering an
‘uncertain prospect’. If the British continued to block the settlement on
agriculture at Brussels which the rest of the Community — by which
he meant the French and the Germans — wanted we would be isolated
and attention would focus on our rebate. I replied that this was
evidently no time for diplomatic language. If he thought that ganging
up with the Germans to ‘isolate Mrs T’ was going to work, he was
sadly mistaken. I had no fear at all of being isolated because I was
demanding that agricultural surpluses be brought under control. M.
Chirac again insisted that if there was to be a row it would turn out
not to be about surpluses but about Britain’s rebate. I advised him not

to threaten me and promised that if there was no satisfactory solution
on agricultural spending and our rebate, there would be no increase in
‘own resources’. But he continued to insist then and over lunch that
the present German presidency’s proposals were the furthest France
was prepared to go.
How much of this was Gallic bluff I could not know. But it certainly
made it all the more important to gauge precisely what the German
position was. The fact that the Germans had the presidency meant, as
always, that they had less scope for openly advocating their own
interests, but this was more than made up for by the extra influence it
would give them behind the scenes.
On the morning of Tuesday 2 February I had three hours of talks
with Chancellor Kohl at No. 10. This was a business-like and quite
successful meeting. Both of us had come with detailed proposals on
each of the main elements of the package which would be on the table
at Brussels. There were still large differences between us on the
agricultural guideline and the stabilizers. He was also minded to be
more accommodating to the southerners and the Commission over the
structural funds than I was. But I was glad to find that he did not press
me at all hard on the British rebate. We ended by discussing what the
French attitude would really turn out to be. With some prescience (or
perhaps knowledge) Chancellor Kohl thought that though it would be
very difficult they might prefer a reasonable settlement now to
postponement.
I flew into Brussels some time after midnight on Wednesday 10
February after having spoken at a Conservative Party National Union
dinner. My first appointment the next day was a breakfast meeting
with Mr Lubbers to agree tactics for the Council. In my speech later
that day I warned against any temptation to run away from the
problem of food surpluses which we all knew had now to be tackled.
The battle lines formed much as could have been predicted. The Dutch
and we were up against the French and the Danes over the agricultural
guideline. The German presidency put forward proposals for the new
‘own resources’ ceiling, which were attacked as too high by the Dutch,
the French and us and as too low by everybody else. M. Chirac argued
passionately for a higher threshold on cereals before the stabilizer
started to work than I and others were prepared to accept. He also
tried, as he had threatened in our earlier conversation, to link Britain’s
budget rebate with the issue of stabilizers. But it was quickly apparent
that this was not going to work. Throughout there was an odd, slightly
theatrical air to his performance which was clearly designed to
impress a domestic audience. President Mitterrand sat in complete
silence throughout these proceedings, restricting himself to a lengthy
speech at dinner about future European developments. Not much
progress was made that day.
Overnight the Commission came up with a compromise package.
But this was rejected by the Germans and the Council broke up for

bilateral meetings without any paper as a basis for discussion.
Chancellor Kohl was now the key, both as President of the Council and
because if the Germans were prepared to do a deal on agricultural
spending the French were unlikely to stand out against it. So late that
afternoon Ruud Lubbers, Hans van den Broek, Jacques Delors,
Geoffrey Howe and I went in to see Chancellor Kohl who was
accompanied by Herr Genscher and several other officials. Chancellor
Kohl’s style of diplomacy is even more direct than mine. He was never
above banging the table and on this occasion he spoke in a paradeground bellow throughout. He said that Germany was making
sacrifices, particularly the German farmers. I replied that British
farmers were facing sacrifices too and that I was being asked to accept
too large an increase in structural funds and too high a ceiling — 1.3
per cent of GNP — for Community ‘own resources’. The argument
went back and forth. M. Delors now proposed a 1.2 per cent ceiling.
This prompted alarmed protests from Chancellor Kohl who thought
that it might jeopardize his farmers’ set-aside scheme. But I said that I
would think further about what had been proposed. I was aware that
the Dutch were becoming restive and would probably not be prepared
to stand out against what was now on offer. In any case, it was
necessary to discuss with my officials precisely what the package
would mean and I could only do this in private. What I did insist upon,
however, was that it should all be set out clearly on paper. As it turned
out this was one of my better decisions.
I had a long discussion with Geoffrey Howe and my officials. We
argued through each element. It seemed to me that the discipline was
going to prove tighter and more effective than I had earlier thought —
and perhaps than others had really understood. So when the full
Council reconvened I was able to join in giving broad support to the
proposals in the paper which was now circulated.
Anyone who imagined that it would now all be plain sailing
underrated the French. The agreement we had reached covered the
main agricultural products at issue. But it assumed that the other
products for which stabilizers had been agreed at Copenhagen would
also be covered. To everyone’s surprise President Mitterrand and M.
Chirac would not agree to this. A heated argument erupted which
lasted more than four hours about their proposal to have the
stabilizers for ‘other products’ referred to the Agriculture Council. In
the end a Danish suggestion that it should go to a Foreign ministers’
meeting in ten days’ time was agreed. Ruud Lubbers and I insisted that
our agreement to the overall package was conditional on the Foreign
ministers not reopening the Copenhagen agreement on ‘other
products’. In fact, the French had to concede the issue when the
Foreign ministers met.
I was right to settle when I did. I had secured my basic aims:
effective and legally binding controls on expenditure, measures to
reduce agricultural surpluses in which automatic price cuts were the

principal weapon, no Oils and Fats tax, and Britain’s rebate which had
saved us some £3 billion in the past three years secure. I had had to
concede a little on the threshold at which stabilizers began to work. I
had had to compromise over the structural funds. I had reluctantly
agreed a new 1.2 per cent of GNP ceiling for Community ‘own
resources’. But it was much better than a draw. Agricultural surpluses
started to fall quite sharply and the new measures to enforce budget
discipline were successful. None of that, of course, changed the
fundamental direction or defects of the Community. The CAP was still
wasteful and costly. Britain was still making a financial contribution
which I considered too high. The bureaucratic and centralizing
tendencies remained. But within its limits the February 1988 Brussels
Agreement was not at all bad.
FREE TRADE V. PROTECTION
It is fair to say that from about this point onwards — early 1988 — the
agenda in Europe began to take an increasingly unwelcome shape. It
also began to deviate sharply from that being pursued in the wider
international community. That does not mean, however, that my own
relations with other European heads of government worsened at a
personal level; far from it. I was sorry — though not surprised — to
see the Right beaten in the French presidential elections. But I sent a
message of congratulations to President Mitterrand and went to see
him in Paris that June to talk about the international scene in general
and the forthcoming Toronto G7 summit and Hanover European
Council in particular.
I found him in understandably good humour now that he had been
freed from the domestic torment of ‘cohabitation’ with the Right. He
was pressing a scheme — not dissimilar to one advanced by Nigel
Lawson — to tackle the crippling level of Third World debt. I would
have had more sympathy with his ideas if France had not been so
determinedly protectionist, an approach which did far more harm to
poorer countries than any amount of overseas aid did good. The
French line was expressed — or rather concealed — in a splendid
piece of Euro-jargon: the concept of ‘globality’. That is to say progress
must be made on all the issues before the GATT at roughly the same
pace, a transparent device for avoiding concentration on the thorniest
issue — that of agricultural subsidies and protection. He was also keen
to have a committee of ‘wise men’ set up to report on how to achieve
economic and monetary union; he specifically hankered after a
European Central Bank. I roundly rejected this. I said that the proposal
for such a bank was motivated by political not technical considerations
and that this was not an area for playing games. The President smiled
and said that it was nice to be reminded that I knew how to say no.
But I had no illusion that he was going to desist because of that.

I also met M. Rocard, the new Socialist Prime Minister. I had met
him before but did not know him well. He spoke disarmingly and I felt
sincerely about his affection for Britain and the special understanding
— inherited from wartime — between the two countries. As French
Socialists go, he was moderate, pragmatic and sensible and I warmed
to him. I hoped that he might come to exercise some moderating
influence on France’s flirtation with European federalism.
On Saturday 18 June 1988 I flew to Toronto for the G7 economic
summit. President Mitterrand had suggested optimistically to me in
Paris that this being President Reagan’s last summit there might be an
inclination to put off difficult decisions. I had replied that I did not
think this likely and, for my part, I was determined to ensure that we
used this occasion to get to grips with agriculture and the GATT. By
the time I reached Toronto I had done my homework on the subject. In
particular, we had devised a mythical beast known informally as
‘Howe’s Cow’ or more precisely as a ‘Producer Subsidy Equivalent’.
This was the calculation of how much agricultural support, whether in
direct subsidy or from protection, each country provided, divided by
the number of cows. The greediest cow turned out to be Japan’s — so
not surprisingly, the Japanese, with some support from the Americans,
disputed our statistical approach.
I was, therefore, well armed with useful facts and figures when
Brian Mulroney, the summit chairman, asked me to open the economic
discussion on the Sunday afternoon. I drew attention to the success of
the current second cycle of summits, now ending, compared with the
first. We had seen economic growth, low inflation and more jobs in
the years since the Montebello summit in 1981, because we had stuck
to getting the fundamentals right rather than concentrating on demand
management. But there was more to do. Above all, we must fight
down protectionism. I strongly urged — and repeated in a further
intervention the following day — that all of us should honour the
commitments made at the start of the GATT Uruguay round in
September 1986 by coming up with firm proposals at the forthcoming
‘Medium Term Review’ meeting of the GATT.
As the dispute over measuring agricultural subsidies exemplified,
free trade is something which almost everyone subscribes to in
principle and finds politically painful in practice. Britain always had
everything to gain from a global open trading system. The United
States too traditionally believed in free trade. But Britain’s own trade
policy was now in the hands of the Community, which contained a
majority of countries with a tradition of cartels and corporatism and a
politically influential agricultural sector. We were in a minority in
Europe when it came to deciding trade policy. As for the United States,
its huge trade deficit had given a protectionist turn to policy which
President Reagan, a convinced free trader, found difficulty resisting.
For its part, Japan not only subsidized and protected its agriculture
more than anyone else; it also continued to place obstacles in the way

of foreign imports of nonagricultural goods and services.
Consequently, I increasingly had to look to the ‘Cairns Group’ of
fourteen countries (which includes Canada, Australia, and Argentina)
and to Third World countries, anxious to export their agriculture and
textiles, to bring pressure on this wealthy western protection racket. I
always regarded free trade as far more important than all the other
ambitious and often counter-productive strategies of global economic
policy — for example the policies of ‘co-ordinated growth’ which led
principally to inflation. Free trade provided a means not only for
poorer countries to earn foreign currency and increase their peoples’
standards of living. It was also a force for peace, freedom and political
decentralization: peace, because economic links between nations
reinforce mutual understanding with mutual interest; freedom,
because trade between individuals bypasses the apparatus of the state
and disperses power to customers not planners; political
decentralization, because the size of the political unit is not dictated
by the size of the market and vice versa.
After some two and a half hours of discussion on this subject at
Toronto we achieved a broadly satisfactory communiqué. It reaffirmed
the Uruguay round commitments and underlined the importance of its
‘Medium Term Meeting’, while avoiding inclusion of what seemed to
me the unrealistic United States objective of no agricultural subsidies
by the year 2000. What remained to be seen was how the GATT
negotiations now actually evolved. Had I been an optimist I might
have drawn comfort from the fact that Toronto was the first time that
M. Delors praised one of my speeches. But I kept my optimism in
check.
DISCUSSION OF EMU
At Toronto I had an hour’s meeting with Chancellor Kohl. Much of it
focused on the forthcoming Hanover summit. Chancellor Kohl,
supported by the German Finance Ministry and the Bundesbank,
seemed ready now to plump for a committee of central bankers rather
than academic experts — as the French and Hans-Dietrich Genscher
wanted — to report on EMU. This I welcomed. But I restated my
unbending hostility to setting up a European Central Bank. By now I
was having to recognize that the chance of stopping the committee
being set up at all was ebbing away; but I was determined to try to
minimize the harm it would do. I also had to recognize that we were
saddled with M. Delors as President of the Commission for another
two years, since my own favoured candidate, Ruud Lubbers, was not
going to stand and the French and Germans supported M. Delors. (In
the end I bit the bullet and seconded M. Delors’s reappointment
myself.)
The Hanover Council turned out to be a fairly good-humoured if
disputatious affair. The most important discussion took place on the

first evening over dinner. Jacques Delors introduced the discussion of
EMU. Chancellor Kohl suggested that a committee of Central Bank
governors with a few outsiders be set up under M. Delors’s
chairmanship. In the ensuing discussion most of the heads of
government wanted the report to centre on a European Central Bank.
Poul Schlüter opposed this and I supported him strongly, quoting from
an excellent article by Karl Otto Pöhl, the President of the
Bundesbank, to illustrate all the difficulties in the way of such an
institution. We succeeded in getting mention of the Central Bank
removed. But otherwise there was nothing I could do to stop the
committee being set up. The Delors Group was to report back to the
June 1989 European Council — that is in a year’s time. I hoped that
the Governor of the Bank of England and the sceptical Herr Pöhl
would manage to put a spoke in the wheel of this particular vehicle of
European integration; unfortunately, as I have already explained, that
was not to be.
My problem throughout these discussions of EMU was twofold. First,
of course, was the fact that I had so few allies; only Denmark, a small
country with plenty of spirit but less weight, was with me. But I was
fighting with one hand tied behind my back for another reason. As a
‘future member’ of the EEC, the UK had agreed a communiqué in Paris
following a conference of heads of government in October 1972. This
reaffirmed ‘the resolve of the member states of the enlarged
Community to move irrevocably [towards] Economic and Monetary
Union, by confirming all the details of the acts passed by the Council
and by the member states’ representatives on 22 March 1971 and 21
March 1972’. Such language may have reflected Ted Heath’s wishes. It
certainly did not reflect mine. But there was no point in picking a
quarrel which we would have lost. So I preferred to let sleeping dogs
lie.
Then, of course, they woke up and started barking in the course of
the negotiation of the Single European Act of 1985–6.1 had not
wanted any reference to EMU in at all. The Germans failed to support
me and so the reference to EMU was inserted. But I had Article 20 of
the Single European Act give my interpretation of what EMU meant;
its title read: ‘Co-operation in Economic and Monetary Policy
(Economic and Monetary Union)’. This enabled me to claim at
subsequent forums that EMU now meant economic and monetary cooperation, not moving towards a single currency. There was a studied
ambiguity about all this. Councils at Hanover in June 1988 and then
at Madrid in 1989 referred back to the Single European Act’s ‘objective
of progressive realization of economic and monetary union’. I was
more or less happy with this, because it meant no more than cooperation. The rest of the European heads of government were equally
happy, because they interpreted it as progress towards a European
Central Bank and a single currency. But at some point, of course, these
two interpretations would clash. And when they did I was bound to be

fighting on ground not of my choosing.
For the fact was that the more I saw of how the Community
operated the less I was attracted by any further steps on the road
towards monetary integration. We advanced our proposals for a ‘hard
ecu’. We issued Treasury bills denominated in ecu terms. And (though
this was done because it was in our own interests, not in order to
please our European partners) we had swept away exchange controls
before anyone else. All this was very communautaire in its way, as I
never ceased to point out when criticized for resisting entry into the
ERM. But my own preference was always for open markets, floating
exchange rates and strong political and economic transatlantic links.
In arguing for that alternative approach I was bound to be
handicapped by the formal commitment to European ‘economic and
monetary union’ — or indeed that of ‘ever closer union’ contained in
the preamble to the original Treaty of Rome. These phrases
predetermined many decisions which we thought we had reserved for
future consideration. This gave a psychological advantage to my
opponents, who never let an opportunity go by of making use of it.
THE BRUGES SPEECH
Not the least of those opponents was Jacques Delors. By the summer of
1988 he had altogether slipped his leash as a fonctionnaire and become
a fully fledged political spokesman for federalism. The blurring of the
roles of civil servants and elected representatives was more in the
continental tradition than in ours. It proceeded from the widespread
distrust which their voters had for politicians in countries like France
and Italy. That same distrust also fuelled the federalist express. If you
have no real confidence in the political system or political leaders of
your own country you are bound to be more tolerant of foreigners of
manifest intelligence, ability and integrity like M. Delors telling you
how to run your affairs. Or to put it more bluntly, if I were an Italian I
might prefer rule from Brussels too. But the mood in Britain was
different. I sensed it. More than that, I shared it and I decided that the
time had come to strike out against what I saw as the erosion of
democracy by centralization and bureaucracy, and to set out an
alternative view of Europe’s future.
It was high time. It was clear that the momentum towards full
blooded EMU, which I always recognized must mean political union
too, was building. In July M. Delors told the European Parliament that
‘we are not going to manage to take all the decisions needed between
now and 1995 unless we see the beginnings of European government
in one form or another,’ and predicted that within ten years the
Community would be the source of ‘80 per cent of our economic
legislation and perhaps even our fiscal and social legislation as well’.
In September he addressed the TUC in Bournemouth calling for
measures to be taken on collective bargaining at the European level.

But there were also more subtle, less easily detectable, but perhaps
even more important signs of the way things were going. That summer
I commissioned a paper from officials which spelt out in precise detail
how the Commission was pushing forward the frontiers of its
‘competence’ into new areas — culture, education, health and social
security. It used a whole range of techniques. It set up ‘advisory
committees’ whose membership was neither appointed by, nor
answerable to, member states and which tended therefore to reach
communautaire decisions. It carefully built up a library of declaratory
language, largely drawn from the sort of vacuous nonsense which
found its way into Council conclusions, in order to justify subsequent
proposals. It used a special budgetary procedure, known as ‘actions
ponctuelles’ which enabled it to finance new projects without a legal
base for doing so. But, most seriously of all, it consistently
misemployed treaty articles requiring only a qualified majority to issue
directives which it could not pass under articles which required
unanimity.
Often, as over the environment, or later on health and hours of
work, it was difficult to explain to the general public precisely why we
opposed the specific measure the Commission wanted. When
commissioners issued directives outside their competence they were
careful to choose popular causes which had support among pressure
groups in member countries, thus presenting themselves as the true
friends of the British worker, pensioner and environmentalist. This
made it politically difficult to resist the creeping expansion of the
Commission’s authority. In theory, it would have been possible to fight
all this in the courts; for time after time the Commission were twisting
the words and intentions of the European Council to its own ends. We
did indeed fight, and won a number of cases on these grounds before
the European Court of Justice (ECJ). But the advice from the lawyers
was that in relation to questions of Community and Commission
competence the ECJ would favour ‘dynamic and expansive’
interpretations of the treaty over restrictive ones. The dice were
loaded against us.
The more I considered all this, the greater my frustration and the
deeper my anger became. Were British democracy, parliamentary
sovereignty, the common law, our traditional sense of fairness, our
ability to run our own affairs in our own way to be subordinated to
the demands of a remote European bureaucracy, resting on very
different traditions? I had by now heard about as much of the
European ‘ideal’ as I could take; I suspected that many others had too.
In the name of this ideal, waste, corruption and abuse of power were
reaching levels which no one who supported, as I had done, entry to
the European Economic Community could have foreseen. Because
Britain was the most stable and developed democracy in Europe we
had perhaps most to lose from these developments. But Frenchmen
who wanted to see France free to decide her own destiny would be

losers too. So would Germans, who wished to retain their own
currency, the deutschmark, which they had made the most credible in
the world.
I was no less conscious of those millions of eastern Europeans living
under communism. How could a tightly centralized, highly regulated,
supra-national European Community meet their aspirations and needs?
Arguably, it was the Czechs, Poles and Hungarians who were the real
— indeed the last — European ‘idealists’; for to them Europe
represented a precommunist past, an idea which symbolized the
liberal values and national cultures that Marxism had sought
unsuccessfully to snuff out.
This wider Europe, stretching perhaps to the Urals and certainly to
include that New Europe across the Atlantic, was an entity which
made at least historical and cultural sense. And in economic terms,
only a truly global approach would do. This then was my thinking as I
turned my mind to what would be the ‘Bruges Speech’.
The hall in which I made my speech was oddly arranged. The
platform from which I spoke was placed in the middle of the long side
so that the audience stretched far to my left and right, with only a few
rows in front of me. But the message got across well enough. And it
was not only my hosts at the College of Europe in Bruges who got
more than they bargained for. The Foreign Office had been pressing
me for several years to accept an invitation to speak there to set out
our European credentials.
I began by doing what the Foreign Office wished. I pointed out just
how much Britain had contributed to Europe over the centuries and
how much we still contributed, with 70,000 British servicemen
stationed there. But what was Europe? I went on to remind my
audience that, contrary to the pretensions of the European
Community, it was not the only manifestation of European identity.
‘We shall always look on Warsaw, Prague and Budapest as great
European cities.’ Indeed I went on to argue that western Europe had
something to learn from the admittedly dreadful experience of its
eastern neighbours and their strong and principled reaction to it:
It is ironic that just when those countries, such as the Soviet Union, which
have tried to run everything from the centre, are learning that success
depends on dispersing power and decisions away from the centre, some in
the Community seem to want to move in the opposite direction. We have not
successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain only to see them
reimposed at a European level, with a European super-state exercising a new
dominance from Brussels.

There were, moreover, powerful non-economic reasons for the
retention of sovereignty and, as far as possible, of power, by nationstates. Not only were such nations functioning democracies, but they
also represented intractable political realities which it would be folly
to seek to override or suppress in favour of a wider but as yet
theoretical European nationhood. I pointed out:

Willing and active co-operation between independent sovereign states is the
best way to build a successful European Community… Europe will be
stronger precisely because it has France as France, Spain as Spain, Britain as
Britain, each with its own customs, traditions and identity. It would be folly
to try to fit them into some sort of identikit European personality.

I set out other guidelines for the future. Problems must be tackled
practically: and there was plenty in the CAP which still needed
tackling. We must have a European Single Market with the minimum
of regulations — a Europe of enterprise. Europe must not be
protectionist: and that must be reflected in our approach to the GATT.
Finally, I stressed the great importance of NATO and warned against
any development (as a result of Franco-German initiatives) of the
Western European Union as an alternative to it. *
I ended on a high note, which was far from ‘anti-European’:
Let Europe be a family of nations, understanding each other better,
appreciating each other more, doing more together, but relishing our
national identity no less than our common European endeavour. Let us have
a Europe which plays its full part in the wider world, which looks outward
not inward, and which preserves that Atlantic Community — that Europe on
both sides of the Atlantic — which is our noblest inheritance and our
greatest strength.

Not even I would have predicted the furore the Bruges speech
unleashed. In Britain, to the horror of the Euro-enthusiasts who
believed that principled opposition to federalism had been ridiculed or
browbeaten into silence, there was a great wave of popular support for
what I had said. It was to become noisily apparent when I addressed
the Conservative Party Conference the following month in much the
same vein.
But the reaction in polite European circles — or at least the official
reaction — was one of stunned outrage. The evening of my speech I
had a vigorous argument over dinner in Brussels with M. Martens, his
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign minister. But perhaps that was
only to be expected from a small country which thought it could wield
more power inside a federal Europe than outside it.
From Brussels I flew to Spain on an official visit — the first by a
British Prime Minister — with the press in hot pursuit, as the story
rumbled on. My host, Felipe Gonzalez, was as always the model of
courtesy and charm. He prudently, if ambiguously, told me that
‘careful study’ of my Bruges speech ‘could lead to some useful
conclusions’. But most of our conversations concentrated on defence
and on Gibraltar. Though relations had much improved since the
Brussels Agreement of 1984 which reopened the Spanish-Gibraltar
border, there was tension over the use of the airport. Spain was, I
knew, doing so well out of the Community that I would never get a
Socialist Spanish Prime Minister to challenge the arrangements that
his country found so lucrative. Equally, I had no doubt that in the long
term a proud, ancient nation like Spain would baulk at continued loss

of national self-determination in exchange for German-financed
subsidies. But that time had not yet arrived.
VISIT TO DEIDESHEIM
The Rhodes European Council in early December of 1988 was
something of a non-event in Community terms, though it was
enlivened for the press by my forthright recriminations against the
Belgians and the Irish for their shabby part in the Ryan affair.* The
Community was — unusually — conscious that with the Delors Report
on EMU in the making it had enough to be getting along with. Nor
was the Greek presidency in a mood to press new initiatives: Mr
Papandreou was in fragile health and his Government’s political
prospects were highly uncertain as a result of financial scandals which
had caught up with it.
Nonetheless something productive did come out of Rhodes. I had
one of my bilaterals with Helmut Kohl who was more sensitive than I
was to the stories which by now regularly appeared in the press about
our bad personal relations. Indeed, he had acquired the habit of
beginning our discussions by stressing the importance of giving the
public impression of being on good terms. In fact, we did not get on at
all badly. The problem was that on certain economic and social
questions we thought along different lines. At Rhodes he pressed again
the invitation he had first made at Chequers in July for me to meet
him at his home near Ludwigshafen in the Rhineland-Palatinate in the
spring: I accepted with the greatest pleasure
As always on these occasions, I was accompanied by Charles Powell.
Charles was my private secretary on foreign affairs from 1984 until I
left office. He worked tirelessly and fast; he was a uniquely gifted
draftsman who invariably in his minutes got both flavour and
substance precisely right; he managed always to be charming and
diplomatic — yet recognized, as I did, that there was more to foreign
policy than diplomacy. He was, in all respects, simply outstanding.
So it was that on Sunday 30 April we arrived in the charming village
of Deidesheim to be met by a beaming Federal Chancellor on his home
soil. In fact, there was not a great deal for him to beam about. He was
in domestic political difficulties. West Germany had been rocked by
the strange phenomenon of ‘Gorby-mania’ and, under intense pressure
from an always instinctively neutralist German public opinion, the
staunchly pro-NATO Chancellor Kohl had begun to shift his ground on
the subject of short-range nuclear weapons (SNF). I took him to task
on this, deploying all the arguments for a credible short-range nuclear
deterrent and for sticking by previously agreed NATO decisions.* The
discussion on this subject lasted two hours and became quite heated.
Chancellor Kohl was, I thought, deeply uncomfortable, as any
politician will be whose instincts and principles push him one way
while his short-term political interests push him the other. But we both

made an effort to live up to what our diplomats rather than the press
— out as ever for a story of Anglo-German ‘hand-bagging’ — wanted.
And indeed the atmosphere at Deidesheim was otherwise amicable.
It was jolly, quaint, sentimental and slightly overdone — gemütlich is, I
think, the German word. Lunch consisted of potato soup, pig’s stomach
(which the German Chancellor clearly enjoyed), sausage, liver
dumplings and sauerkraut.
Then we drove to the great cathedral of Speyer nearby, in whose
crypt are to be found the tombs of at least four Holy Roman Emperors.
As we entered the cathedral the organ struck up a Bach fugue.
Chancellor Kohl, knowing how much I love church music, had
thoughtfully arranged this gesture. Outside, a large crowd had
gathered which I understood was telling the Chancellor how right he
was to get British and American tanks off German soil and stop the
low-level flying.
Only afterwards did I learn that Helmut Kohl had taken Charles
Powell aside behind a tomb in the cathedral crypt to say that now I
had seen him on his home ground, on the borders of France, surely I
would understand that he — Helmut Kohl — was as much European as
German. I understood what Helmut meant and I rather liked him for
it. But I had to doubt his reasoning.
This desire among modern German politicians to merge their
national identity in a wider European one is understandable enough,
but it presents great difficulties to self-conscious nation-states in
Europe. In effect, the Germans, because they are nervous of governing
themselves, want to establish a European system in which no nation
will govern itself. Such a system could only be unstable in the long
term and, because of Germany’s size and preponderance, is bound to
be lop-sided. Obsession with a European Germany risks producing a
German Europe. In fact this approach to the German problem is a
delusion: it is also a distraction from the real task of German
statesmanship, which must be to strengthen and deepen the post-1945
traditions of West German democracy under the new and admittedly
challenging conditions of unification. That would both benefit
Germany and reassure her neighbours.
EUROPEAN ELECTIONS
By now attention in British politics was turning to two issues which,
much as I sought to disentangle them, became entwined: the elections
to the European Parliament and the occasion of my tenth anniversary.
On the second of these, I had given strict instructions to Central Office
and the Party that it should be handled with as little fuss as possible. I
gave one or two interviews; I received a commemorative vase from the
National Union; and a rather attractive publication was issued by the
Party, which was a modest success without being exactly a bestseller.

But, of course, there were plenty of journalists anxious to write
‘reflective’ pieces on ten years of Thatcher and to conclude, as I knew
they would, that a decade of this woman was quite enough.
In such an atmosphere it was natural that the Labour Party would
claim that the 1989 European elections were a ‘referendum’ on
Thatcherism in general and the Bruges approach in particular. I might
have accepted that the European elections were a sort of judgement on
Bruges if we had had European candidates who were Brugesist rather
than federalist. With a few notable exceptions that was not the case.
As every advertising expert or political strategist will tell you,
perhaps the most important requirement in any campaign is to have
one clear message. But the Conservative Party now seemed to have
two quite contradictory messages which Peter Brooke, as Party
Chairman, and Christopher Prout, as leader of the European
Democratic Group (EDG — the Conservative MEPs from Denmark,
Spain and the UK) struggled to try to reconcile. Many leading
members of the EDG had gone into the European Parliament because
their views were out of sympathy with the rest of the party: they were
a residue of Heathism. Their criticisms of the campaign strategy, of
our general policy towards Europe and — whenever they thought they
could get away with it — of me too rebounded directly on themselves.
For, by undermining the Party’s credibility on European matters they
destroyed their own political prospects.
I had put Geoffrey Howe in charge of preparing the manifesto. He
tried to reach a consensus and consequently it was an unexciting
document, although nicely written by Chris Patten. The advertising by
contrast was sharp but not very good. I was shown the last proposed
advertisement of the campaign when I was at Central Office after one
of my few press conferences of the elections and was not at all happy
with it. So, with various astonished creative experts standing around, I
designed my own which read: ‘Conservatives have created a strong
Britain. Vote Conservative today for a strong Europe.’ Uninspired,
perhaps, but direct and a good deal more effective than the frivolous
and obscure advertisements we had used earlier.
The overall strategy was simple. It was to bring Conservative voters
— so many of whom were thoroughly disillusioned with the
Community — out to vote. Perhaps it might have worked if the
message had been got across with greater conviction and vigour by the
candidates themselves and if we had been free of highly publicized
attacks from Ted Heath and others. In fact, at the very last moment —
as the regular polling information which I received subsequently
confirmed — there was a late surge to the Green Party which undercut
our vote. People had treated the European elections rather as they
would a by-election, voting not to effect real changes in their lives but
to make a protest against the sitting government. Labour were the
beneficiaries and gained thirteen seats from us. For all the mitigating
factors, I was not happy. The result would encourage all those who

were out to undermine me and my approach to Europe.
THE MADRID EUROPEAN COUNCIL
This did not take long to occur. I have already described how Geoffrey
Howe and Nigel Lawson tried to hustle me into setting a date for
sterling’s entry into the ERM and how I avoided this at the Madrid
Council in June 1989.* In fact, as I had expected, the ERM was
something of an irrelevance at Madrid. The two real issues were the
handling of the Delors Report on EMU and the question of whether the
Community should have its own Social Charter.
I was, of course, opposed root and branch to the whole approach of
the Delors Report. But I was not in a position to prevent some kind of
action being taken upon it. Consequently, I decided to stress three
points. First, the Delors Report must not be the only basis for further
work on EMU. It must be possible to introduce other ideas, such as our
own of a hard ecu and a European Monetary Fund. Second, there must
be nothing automatic about the process of moving towards EMU either
as regards timing or content. In particular, we would not be bound
now to what might be in Stage 2 or when it would be implemented.
Third, there should be no decision now to go ahead with an InterGovernmental Conference on the Report. A fall-back position would be
that any such IGC must receive proper — and as lengthy as possible —
preparation.
As regards the Social Charter, the issue was simpler. I considered it
quite inappropriate for rules and regulations about working practices
or welfare benefits to be set at Community level. The Social Charter
was quite simply a socialist charter — devised by socialists in the
Commission and favoured predominantly by socialist member states. I
had been prepared to go along (with some misgivings) with the
assertion in Council communiqués of the importance of the ‘social
dimension’ of the Single Market. But I always considered that this
meant the advantages in terms of jobs and living standards which
would flow from freer trade.
The Foreign Office would probably have liked me to soften my
stance. They liked to remind me of how Keith Joseph in Opposition
had written a pamphlet on ‘Why Britain Needs a Social Market
Economy’. But the sort of ‘social market’ Keith and I advocated had
precious little similarity with the way the term ‘Sozialmarktwirtschaft’
had come to be used in Germany. There it had become a kind of
corporatist, highly collectivized, ‘consensus’-based economic system,
which pushed up costs, suffered increasingly from market rigidities
and relied on qualities of teutonic self-discipline to work at all. The
extension of such a system throughout the Community would, of
course, serve Germany well, in the short term at least, because it
would impose German wage costs and overheads on poorer European
countries which would otherwise have competed all too successfully

with German goods and services. The fact that the cost of extending
this system to the poorer countries would also be financed by huge
transnational subsidies paid by the German taxpayer seemed to be
overlooked by German politicians. But that is what happens when
producer cartels rather than customer demands become dominant in
any system, whether it is formally described as socialist or not.
When I went to Madrid I took with me a document setting out all
the benefits enjoyed by British citizens — the Health Service, health
and safety at work, pensions and benefits for the disabled, training
provisions and so on. I also advanced the argument that the voluntary
Council of Europe Social Charter was quite sufficient and that we did
not need a Community document which would, I knew, be the basis of
directives aimed at introducing the Delors brand of socialism by the
back door.
Most of the first day’s discussions in Madrid were taken up with
EMU. Late in the afternoon we turned to the Single Market and the
‘social dimension’. I have already described how I used my first speech
to spell out my conditions for entering the ERM. But I also backed
Poul Schlüter who challenged paragraph 39 of the Delors Report,
which essentially spelt out the ‘in for a penny, in for a pound
approach’ which the federalists favoured. The other extreme was
represented by France. President Mitterrand insisted on setting
deadlines for an IGC and for completion of Stages 2 and 3, which at
one point he suggested should be 31 December 1992.
The argument then turned to the Social Charter. I was sitting next to
Sr. Cavaco Silva, the rather sound Portugese Prime Minister who
would doubtless have been sounder still if his country was not so poor
and the Germans quite so rich.
‘Don’t you see’, I said, ‘that the Social Charter is intended to stop
Portugal attracting investment from Germany because of your lower
wage costs? This is German protectionism. There will be directives
based on it and your jobs will be lost.’ But he seemed unconvinced
that the charter would be anything other than a general declaration.
And perhaps he thought that if the Germans were prepared to pay
enough in ‘cohesion’ money the deal would not be too bad. So I was
alone in opposing the charter.
Ironically, when — on the second day of the Council — it came to
the drafting of the section of the communiqué which dealt with EMU it
was France who was the odd man out. Insofar as there could be an
acceptable text which advanced us towards an unacceptable objective
I felt that I had got it. All my requirements were satisfied by it. We
could not stop an IGC because all it needed was a simple majority
vote, but its outcome had been left open and its timing was unclear.
President Mitterrand’s attempt to have a deadline for Stages 2 and 3
inserted in the text was unsuccessful. To the irritation of Sr. Gonzalez,
who had hoped to avoid more discussion, I made what I described as a
‘unilateral declaration’. It ran:

The United Kingdom notes that there is no automaticity about the move to
nor the timing or content of Stage 2. The UK will take its decisions on these
matters in the light of the progress which has by then been made in Stage 1,
in particular over the completion of all measures agreed as being necessary
to complete.

The phrasing was unpoetic but the meaning clear. This prompted
President Mitterrand to make his own declaration to the effect that the
IGC should meet as soon as possible after 1 July 1990. And so the
Madrid Council came to an end not with a bang but two whimpers.
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION BICENTENNIAL
My disagreements with the French never led to ill-feeling. This was
lucky for I was shortly to attend the G7 in Paris which had largely
been overtaken by the hugely expensive — and for Parisians wildly
inconvenient — celebrations of the Bicentennial of the French
Revolution. The French Revolution is one of the few real watersheds in
the history of political ideas. For most — though not all — Frenchmen
it is nowadays accepted as the basis of the French state, so that even
the most conservative Frenchman seems to sing ‘the Marseillaise’ with
enthusiasm. For most other Europeans it is regarded with mixed
feelings because it led to French armies devastating Europe, but it also
stimulated movements which led eventually to national independence.
For me as a British Conservative, with Edmund Burke the father of
Conservatism and first great perceptive critic of the Revolution as my
ideological mentor, the events of 1789 represent a perennial illusion in
politics. The French Revolution was a Utopian attempt to overthrow a
traditional order — one with many imperfections, certainly — in the
name of abstract ideas, formulated by vain intellectuals, which lapsed,
not by chance but through weakness and wickedness, into purges,
mass murder and war. In so many ways it anticipated the still more
terrible Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. The English tradition of liberty,
however, grew over the centuries: its most marked features are
continuity, respect for law and a sense of balance, as demonstrated by
the Glorious Revolution of 1688. When I was questioned about what
the French Revolution had done for human rights by journalists from
Le Monde on the eve of my visit I felt I ought to point out some of this.
I said:
Human rights did not begin with the French Revolution… [they] really stem
from a mixture of Judaism and Christianity… [we English] had 1688, our
quiet revolution, where Parliament exerted its will over the King… it was not
the sort of Revolution that France’s was… ‘Liberty, equality, fraternity’ —
they forgot obligations and duties I think. And then of course the fraternity
went missing for a long time.

The headline over my remarks in Le Monde ran ‘“Les droits de
l’homme n’ont pas commencé en France,” nous déclare Mme
Thatcher.’

It was on this note that I arrived in Paris for the Bicentennial. I
brought with me for President Mitterrand a first edition of Charles
Dickens’s A Tale of Two Cities, which he, a connoisseur of such things,
loved, but which also made somewhat more elegantly the same point
as my interview. The celebrations themselves were on the scale which
only a Hollywood studio — or France — could manage: an almost
endless procession, a military parade, an opera with pride of place in
the set being given to a huge guillotine.
The G7 summit itself definitely took second place to this pageantry.
Indeed, this posed a potential problem. A large number of Third World
heads of government had been invited to Paris to the celebrations and
there seemed some prospect of President Mitterrand suddenly seeking
to relaunch another ‘North-South’ dialogue of the sort we had
thankfully left behind at Cancún.* I alerted President Bush — arriving
for his first G7 — to this when I had a bilateral meeting with him at
the US Embassy before the summit. He said that he thought there was
a problem in blocking such a move without appearing a ‘parsimonious
bunch of don’t cares’. I said that this did not seem to me to be much of
a problem. Nor did it prove to be. The French in the end thought
better of introducing this controversial idea, preferring to rest on the
level of generalities.
George Bush and I made the familiar pleas for free trade under the
GATT. President Mitterrand — with some help from me — got the text
of his Declaration on Human Rights (with its obvious revolutionary
symbolism) accepted almost word for word. There were discussions of
the environment and drugs. In fact, everyone left happy and little of
note was achieved. It was the sort of occasion which in earlier years
had given international summitry a bad name. But President
Mitterrand’s final dinner for heads of government held in the new
pyramid in the forecourt of the Louvre was one of the best I have ever
eaten. Some traditions are too important for even the French to
overthrow.
CABINET RESHUFFLE
I returned to London conscious of unfinished business. The European
election results had no particular significance in themselves. But they
had revealed a groundswell of discontent which could not be ignored.
That discontent was most in evidence in the Parliamentary Party. A
minority of Conservative MPs were uneasy about the line I was taking
on Europe. But more important was the fact that there was a
widespread restlessness because avenues of promotion into the ranks
of the Government seemed blocked. I too felt that changes were
required. When a prime minister has been in power for ten years he or
she must be that much more aware of the dangers of the government
as a whole appearing to be tired or stale. Since I hardly ever felt
seriously tired and never felt stale I had no intention of giving that

impression. I decided to make some changes in the Cabinet to free up
posts at every level and bring on some new faces.
I had also been thinking about my own future. I knew that I had a
good few more years of active service left in me and I intended to see
through to the end the restoration of our economic strength, the
fulfilment of our radical social reforms and that remodelling of Europe
on which I had embarked with the Bruges speech. I wanted to leave
behind me when I went, perhaps halfway into the next Parliament,
several candidates with proven character and experience from whom
the choice of my successor could be made. For various reasons I did
not believe that any of my own political generation were suitable. ‘Of
course, she would say that, wouldn’t she,’ may be the obvious retort.
But closer consideration will, I hope, show I had good reasons. If one
considers the possibilities — first among those who were of my own
way of thinking: Norman Tebbit was now concentrating on looking
after Margaret and on his business interests; Nick Ridley who never
suffered fools gladly would not have been acceptable to Tory MPs;
Cecil Parkinson had been damaged in the eyes of the old guard.
Geoffrey Howe I shall come to shortly. Nigel Lawson had no interest in
the job — and I had no interest in encouraging him. Michael Heseltine
was not a team player and certainly not a team captain. Anyway, I saw
no reason to hand over to anyone of roughly my age while I was fit
and active. In the next generation, by contrast, there was a variety of
possible candidates who ought to be tested in high office: John Major,
Douglas Hurd, Ken Baker, Ken Clarke, Chris Patten and perhaps
Norman Lamont and Michael Howard. I felt it was not for me to select
my successor. But I did have the obligation to see that there were
several proven candidates from whom to choose.
I was, however, wrong on one important matter. Of course, I
understood that some of my Cabinet colleagues and other ministers
were more to the left, some more to the right. But I believed that they
had generally become convinced of the Tightness of the basic
principles as I had. Orthodox finance, low levels of regulation and
taxation, a minimal bureaucracy, strong defence, a willingness to
stand up for British interests wherever and whenever threatened — I
did not believe that I had to open windows into men’s souls on these
matters. The arguments for them seemed to me to have been won. I
now know that such arguments are never finally won.
A little earlier I left aside Geoffrey Howe from my discussion of
possible leadership candidates. Something had happened to Geoffrey.
His enormous capacity for work remained, but his clarity of purpose
and analysis had dimmed. I did not think he was any longer a possible
leader. But worse than that, I could not have him as Foreign Secretary
— at least while Nigel Lawson was Chancellor — after his behaviour
on the eve of the Madrid Council. Perhaps if I had known that Nigel
was about to resign I would have kept Geoffrey at the Foreign Office
for at least a little longer. As it was, I was determined to move him

aside for a younger man.
I decided that two ministers should leave the Cabinet altogether.
Paul Channon was loyal and likeable. But Transport was becoming a
very important department in which public presentation was at a
premium — what with the appalling disasters which seemed to plague
us at this time and in the light of the traffic congestion which Britain’s
new prosperity brought with it. I asked Paul to leave and he did so
with perfect good humour. I appointed Cecil Parkinson to his place.
Deciding to ask John Moore to go was even more of a wrench. He was
of my way of thinking. At Health it was he — rather than his successor
Ken Clarke — who had really got the Health review under way. At
Social Security, after I split the DHSS into two departments, he had
been courageous and radical in his thinking about dependency and
poverty. But, as I have explained, John had never fully recovered, at
least psychologically, from the debilitating illness he suffered while
Secretary of State at the old combined DHSS. So I asked him to make
way and appointed Tony Newton, a stolid, left-inclining figure but one
with a good command of the House and of his brief. I also brought
into the Cabinet Peter Brooke who had been a much loved and utterly
dependable Party Chairman. He wanted to be Ulster Secretary and I
gave him the job, moving Tom King to the Defence Ministry, vacated
by George Younger who wanted to leave the Government to
concentrate on his business interests. George’s departure was
something of a blow. I valued his common sense, trusted his
judgement and relied on his loyalty. His career is proof of the fact
that, contrary to myth, gentlemen still have a place in politics.
But there were three main changes which determined the shape of
the reshuffle and the reception it received. In reverse order of
importance: I moved Chris Patten to the Environment Department to
succeed Nick Ridley, who went to the DTI (David Young left the
Cabinet at his request and became Deputy Chairman of the Party); I
moved Ken Baker to become Party Chairman from the Department of
Education, where he was succeeded by John MacGregor. And John
was succeeded by John Gummer who entered the Cabinet as Minister
for Agriculture.
But first, and crucially, I called in Geoffrey Howe and said that I
wanted him to leave the Foreign Office, where I intended to put John
Major. It was predictable that Geoffrey would be displeased. He had
come to enjoy the trappings of his office and his two houses, in
Carlton Gardens in London and Chevening in Kent. I offered him the
Leadership of the House of Commons at a time when the House was
shortly to be televised for the first time. It was a big job and I hoped
he would recognize the fact. But he just looked rather sullen and said
that he would have to talk to Elspeth first. This, of course, held up the
whole process. I could see no other ministers until this matter was
decided. Geoffrey also, I believe, saw David Waddington, the Chief
Whip, who had advised me to keep Geoffrey in the Cabinet in some

capacity. David meant well by this advice, but perhaps I should have
asked Geoffrey to go altogether, for he clearly never forgave me. Back
and forth to Downing Street messages passed in the course of which I
offered Geoffrey the Home Office — knowing in advance that he
would almost certainly not accept — then, after conferring with Nigel
Lawson, Dorneywood, the Chancellor’s country house which I rightly
thought that he would accept, and finally, with some reluctance and at
his insistence, the title of Deputy Prime Minister which I had held in
reserve as a final sweetener. This is a title with no constitutional
significance but which Willie Whitelaw (until his stroke in December
1987 and subsequent resignation the following month) had almost
made his own because of his stature and seniority. But because
Geoffrey had bargained for the job, it never conferred the status which
he hoped. In practical terms it just meant that Geoffrey sat on my
immediate left at Cabinet meetings — a position he may well have
come to regret.
The delay in concluding the reshuffle was bound to prompt
speculation. But it was, I am told, Geoffrey’s partisans who leaked the
content of our discussions in a singularly inept attempt to damage me.
As a result he received a very bad press about the houses, which was
not unmerited, but which he doubtless blamed on me.
John Major was not at first very keen on becoming Foreign
Secretary. A modest man, aware of his inexperience, he would
probably have preferred a less grand appointment. But I knew that if
he was to have a hope of becoming Party leader, it would be better if
he had held one of the three great offices of state. I should add that I
had not, contrary to much speculation, reached a firm decision that
John was my preferred successor. I had simply concluded that he must
be given wider public recognition and greater experience if he was to
compete with the talented self-publicists who would be among his
rivals. Unfortunately, because of Nigel Lawson’s resignation, he had no
opportunity to show what he was made of at the Foreign Office before
returning to the Treasury.
In moving Nick Ridley to the DTI I was generally seen to be
responding to the criticisms of him by the environmental lobby. This
was not so. I knew he wanted a change. I was, of course, quite aware
of the fact that the romantics and cranks of the movement did not like
it when he insisted on basing policy on science rather than prejudice. I
also suspected that from Chris Patten they would get a more emollient
approach. Certainly, I subsequently found myself repeatedly at odds
with Chris, for with him presentation on environmental matters
always seemed to be at the expense of substance. But I also wanted
Nick in the second most important economic department because of
the need to have his support on the key issues of industry and Europe.
Ken Baker’s appointment as Party Chairman was an attempt to
improve the Government’s presentation. Ken — like Chris Patten —
had started off on the left of the Party. But unlike Chris, Ken had

genuinely moved to the centre. In any case his great skills were in
publicity. And I never forgot that for every few Thatchers, Josephs and
Ridleys you need at least one Ken Baker to concentrate on
communicating the message. I was also happy now to appoint John
MacGregor with his Scottish devotion to Education as the right person
to deal with the nuts and bolts of making our education reforms work.
My appointment of Ken Baker to the chairmanship was a success. He
served me with vigour and enthusiasm right to the end, however hot
the political kitchen became. We had never been close political allies,
so I was doubly indebted to him for this.
The immediate impact of the reshuffle was much worse than I had
expected because of the stories of what Geoffrey had or had not been
offered and demanded. Once the initial reaction had passed, it was
clear that we benefited from the new look the Government had
acquired. More seriously, though, Geoffrey was still well placed to
make trouble for me and the balance of the Cabinet had slipped
slightly further to the left with the promotion of Chris Patten and John
Gummer and the departure of John Moore more than compensating
for the arrival of Norman Lamont, who was on the right. Of course,
none of this mattered as long as crises which threatened my authority
could be avoided.
THE FRANCO-GERMAN AXIS — AND ‘POLITICAL UNION’
In fact they came not in single spies but in battalions. The winter of
1989 saw those revolutionary changes which led to the collapse of
communism in eastern Europe. In the longer term the emergence of
free, independent and anti-socialist governments in the region would
provide me with potential allies in my crusade for a wider, looser
Europe. But the immediate effect, through the prospect and then the
reality of German reunification, was to strengthen the hand of
Chancellor Kohl and fuel the desire of President Mitterrand and M.
Delors for a federal Europe which would ‘bind in’ the new Germany to
a structure within which its preponderance would be checked.
Although these matters are best dealt with later in the context of EastWest relations, they formed the background to the ever more intense
battles on monetary and political union in which I henceforth found
myself engaged.
After Spain the European Community presidency passed to France.
Partly in order to ensure that eastern Europe did not dominate the
European Council scheduled for December at Strasbourg, President
Mitterrand called a special Council in November in Paris specifically to
discuss the consequences of events in the East and the fall of the Berlin
Wall. He was also pressing hard for the creation of a European Bank of
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in order to channel
investment and assistance to the emerging democracies. I was sceptical
about whether such an institution was really necessary. The case had

not been made that aid of this dimension had to go through a
European institution, as opposed to national or wider international
ones. I conceded the point in Strasbourg; but my wishes were
eventually met because the EBRD now sensibly involves the Americans
and Japanese, not just the Europeans. President Mitterrand and I
finally put together a deal in 1990: I agreed that his protégé Jacques
Attali would be EBRD President and he agreed that the bank would be
situated in London.
To some extent the French strategy of holding an ‘unofficial’ Paris
Council on East-West relations worked because the Strasbourg Council
concentrated — at least in its official sessions — heavily on the more
narrowly European matters of EMU and the Social Charter. I was as
strongly opposed to the holding of an IGC on economic and monetary
union as ever. Equally, I had little hope of blocking it altogether. The
French aim was to set a date for the IGC and this I still hoped to stave
off. Until a few days before the start of the Council we were optimistic
that the Germans would support us in calling for ‘further preparation’
before the IGC met. But in a classic demonstration of the way in which
the Franco-German axis always seemed to re-form in time to dominate
the proceedings, Chancellor Kohl went along with President
Mitterrand’s wishes. By the time I arrived in Strasbourg I knew that I
would be more or less on my own. I decided to be sweetly reasonable
throughout, since there was no point in causing gratuitous offence
when I could not secure what I really wanted. It was agreed that the
IGC would meet under the Italian presidency before the end of 1990,
but after the German elections. As for the Social Charter at which I
had directed my fire at Madrid, I reaffirmed that I was not prepared to
endorse the text, my determination having been if anything
strengthened by the fact that the Commission was now proposing to
bring forward no fewer than forty-three separate proposals, including
seventeen legally binding directives, in the areas which the charter
covered. That effectively ended the discussion of the charter from our
point of view. On EMU I would return to the fray in Rome.
In the first half of 1990, however, there was the Irish presidency to
contend with. The unwelcome habit of calling extra ‘informal’ Councils
proved catching. Charles Haughey decided that another one was
needed in order to consider events in eastern Europe and the
implications for the Community of German unification. Perhaps that is
what Mr Haughey really envisaged, but for others this was just an
opportunity to keep up the federalist momentum.
‘Political union’ was now envisaged alongside ‘monetary union’. In a
sense, of course, this was only logical. A single currency and a single
economic policy ultimately imply a single government. But behind the
concept of ‘political union’ there lay a special Franco-German agenda.
The French wanted to curb German power. To this end, they envisaged
a stronger European Council with more majority voting: but they did
not want to see the powers of the Commission or the European

Parliament increased. The French were federalists on grounds of
tactics rather than conviction. The Germans wanted ‘political union’
for different reasons and by different means. For them it was partly the
price of achieving quick reunification with East Germany on their own
terms and with all the benefits which would come from Community
membership, partly a demonstration that the new Germany would not
behave like the old Germany from Bismarck to Hitler. In this cause,
the Germans were prepared to see more powers for the Commission
and they gave special importance to increasing the power and
authority of the European Parliament. So the Germans were federalists
by conviction. The French pushed harder for political union: but it was
the agenda of the Germans, who were increasingly the senior partner
of the Franco-German axis, which was dominant.
For my part I was opposed to political union of either kind. But the
only way that I could hope to stop it was by getting away from the
standard Community approach whereby a combination of high-flown
statements of principle and various procedural devices prevented
substantive discussion of what was at stake until it was too late.
Within the Community I must aim to open up the divisions between
the French and the Germans. At home I must point out in striking
language just what ‘political union’ would and would not mean if it
was taken at all seriously. Far too much of the Community’s history
had consisted of including nebulous phrases in treaties and
communiqués, then later clothing them with federal meaning which
we had been assured they never possessed. Consequently, I decided
that I would go to Dublin with a speech which would set out what
political union was not and should never be. This seemed the best way
of having all concerned define — and disagree about — what it was.
There was no doubt about how determined the French and Germans
were in their federalist intentions. Shortly before the Council met in
Dublin at the end of April President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl
issued a joint public statement calling for the Dublin Council to
‘initiate preparations for an Inter-Governmental Conference on
political union’. They also called on the Community to ‘define and
implement a common foreign and security policy’. President
Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl chose at about the same time to send
a joint letter to the President of Lithuania urging temporary
suspension of that country’s declaration of independence in order to
ease the way for talks with Moscow. As I took some pleasure in
pointing out in my subsequent speech at the Council, this was done
without any consultation with the rest of the Community, let alone
NATO — it demonstrated that the likelihood of a common ‘foreign and
security policy’ was somewhat remote.
I made my speech early on in the proceedings over a working lunch.
I said that the way to dispel fears was to make clear what we did not
mean when we were talking about political union. We did not mean
that there would be a loss of national identity. Nor did we mean giving

up separate heads of state, either the monarchies to which six of us
were devoted or the presidencies which the other six member states
favoured. We did not intend to suppress national parliaments; the
European Parliament must have no role at the expense of national
parliaments. We did not intend to change countries’ electoral systems.
We would not be altering the role of the Council of Ministers. Political
union must not mean any greater centralization of powers in Europe at
the expense of national governments and parliaments. There must be
no weakening of the role of NATO and no attempt to turn foreign
policy co-operation into a restriction on the rights of states to conduct
their own foreign policy.
To deliver a ten-minute speech with one’s tongue in one’s cheek is
as much a physical as a rhetorical achievement. For of course this was
precisely the route which political union, if taken seriously, would go.
Perhaps only my remarks about heads of state — which were widely
reported — added a new element to the barely hidden agenda of the
European Commission and those who thought like it. My speech did
also have some immediate effect, for it rapidly became clear in the
discussion that heads of government were either unable — or perhaps
at this stage unwilling — to spell out precisely what political union
meant for them. Top marks for calculated ambiguity, however, must
surely have gone to Sig. Andreotti, who suggested that although we
must set up an IGC on political union, it would be dangerous to try to
reach a clear-cut definition of what political union was. Mr Haughey
wound up the discussion by announcing blandly that almost all the
points I had mentioned in my remarks would be excluded from
political union. And perhaps that was said with tongue in cheek as
well.
At the end of June we were back in Dublin again. The Community
Foreign ministers had been told to go away and produce a paper on
political union for the European Council’s consideration. I hoped that I
had at least put down a marker against the sort of proposals which
were likely to come before us at some future stage. But I was in no
position to stop an IGC being called. I spent more time elaborating on
our latest thinking on the hard ecu proposal. Anything that I could do
to influence the discussions in the IGC on EMU which would run in
parallel with that on political union was of value. I took most
satisfaction, however, at this Council from stopping the FrancoGerman juggernaut in its tracks on the question of financial credits to
the Soviet Union. I was not generally convinced that allowing former
communist countries in eastern Europe — let alone the communist
USSR — to build up more debt would do them any favours. Above all,
any assistance must be properly targeted and must be intended to
reward and promote practical reform rather than — as I was to put it
in discussion at the G7 in Houston the following month — ‘providing
an oxygen tent for the survival of much of the old system’.

President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl, however, were more
interested in power politics and grand gestures. Shortly before the
Dublin Council opened they had agreed to propose a multi-billion
dollar loan to the Soviets and over dinner on the second day they tried
to bounce the rest of us into endorsing this. I said that this was quite
unacceptable. No board of directors of a company would ever behave
in such an unbusiness-like way. We should not do so either. There
must be a proper study done before any such decision was made. After
much argument, which continued the following morning, my approach
prevailed.
EMU AND THE GATT
Of the two, it was EMU rather than political union which posed the
more immediate threat. What was so frustrating was that others who
shared my views had a variety of reasons for not expressing them and
preferring to let me receive the criticism for doing so. The weaker
economies would have been devastated by a single currency, but they
hoped to receive sufficient subsidies to make their acquiescence
worthwhile. The classic case was that of Greece. I became all too used
to a Greek chorus of support for whatever ambitious proposals
Germany made.
Nor were the Germans at one on the move towards European
economic and monetary union. From time to time Karl Otto Pöhl had
been outspokenly critical of the concept. As I understood it, the
pressure for EMU was coming from France which found it
unacceptable to have monetary policy dominated by the deutschmark
and the Bundesbank. The Bundesbank would not have had any
problem sticking with the ERM rather than going further, but the
political pressure for EMU was now very strong. I always had the
highest respect for the Bundesbank and its record of keeping down
inflation in Germany and I found it significant that those who
contributed most to this achievement often had least time for a single
European currency which would, of course, have meant the end of the
deutschmark.
To get away from the often parochial atmosphere of the overfrequent European Councils to a meeting of the G7 was always a relief.
That at Houston in July was the first chaired by President Bush, who
was by now imposing very much his own style on the US
Administration. These economic summits were by no means just
‘economic’ any longer: nor could they be when the economic and
political world order was changing so radically and rapidly. In the
forefront of all our minds was what needed to happen to ensure order,
stability and tolerable prosperity in the lands of the crumbling USSR.
But no less important was that at the G7 I could argue much more
effectively for free trade and recruit allies for my cause than I could
within the narrower framework of the Community.

It was scorching hot in Houston — so hot indeed that as heads of
government stood watching the opening ceremonies the ever
thoughtful and technology conscious Americans arranged for us to
have special air conditioning around our feet, blowing up from the
ground. President Bush asked me to open the discussion on the
economy and, after noting the implications of the collapse of
communism, I concentrated on the imminent danger of the collapse of
free trade unless the GATT round was successfully completed. I said
that it was vital that the world did not relapse into blocs, particularly
in trade and monetary matters. That would be a step backwards with
damaging economic and political consequences, particularly for the
countries which were excluded. We should, in fact, be looking beyond
the present GATT round to see how the process of freeing up world
trade in goods and services could be continued.
The discussion returned to trade the following day. I now strongly
supported Brian Mulroney who argued that the biggest losers if the
GATT failed would be the less developed countries (LDCs). I also
reminded those present of the huge amounts still being spent by the
European Community, the United States and Japan on agricultural
support. In fact, the section of the Houston communiqué which dealt
with trade constituted the best and toughest statement ever made by
the major economies on the subject. The tragedy was that the
European Community’s commitment to trade liberalization was only
skin deep, as subsequent events were to show.
THE ROME EUROPEAN COUNCIL
I flew into Rome at midday on Saturday 27 October knowing full well
that this would be a difficult occasion. But I still did not realize how
difficult. This time the excuse for holding an ‘informal’ Council before
the formal Council in December was even more transparent than in
Paris or Dublin. The idea was allegedly to take stock of preparations
for the forthcoming CSCE summit and to discuss relations with the
Soviet Union.* In fact, the Italians wanted to pre-empt the outcome of
the two IGCs on EMU and political union. Nobody bothered to explain
why a special Council was necessary before the IGCs reported.
As always with the Italians, it was difficult throughout to distinguish
confusion from guile: but plenty of both was evident. In his ‘bidding
letter’ to the Council Sig. Andreotti made no mention of the need to
discuss the GATT Uruguay round. I wrote back insisting that if the
Community Trade and Agriculture ministers had not reached
agreement on the Community offer on agriculture beforehand we must
discuss the matter at Rome because time was running out.
More of a clue to the Italians’ intentions was perhaps given by the
Italian Foreign minister’s letter which went so far as to suggest a
provision for future transfer of powers from member states to the

Community without treaty amendment. The Italians gave out — and it
was well reported in the press — that they would be taking a
moderate line, not pressing for a specific date for the start of Stage 2
of EMU and noting that Britain’s hard ecu proposal must be taken
seriously. A long and often contradictory list of proposals on political
union had been drawn up by the presidency, including plans for a
common foreign policy, extended Community competence, more
majority voting, greater powers for the European Parliament and other
matters. The precise purpose of this paper remained unclear. What I
did not know was that behind the scenes the Italians had agreed with
a proposal emanating from Germany and endorsed by Christian
Democrat leaders from several European countries at an earlier caucus
meeting that the GATT should not be discussed at the Council. Had
there been such a discussion, of course, they would have found it more
difficult to portray me as the odd one out and themselves as sea-green
internationalists.
Chancellor Kohl had spoken publicly of the need to set deadlines for
the work of the IGCs and for Stage 2 of EMU. But on the eve of the
Rome Council he took a surprisingly soft line with Douglas Hurd, now
Foreign Secretary, about his intentions. Herr Kohl suggested that
perhaps the conclusions of the special Council could say something
about a ‘consensus building around the idea’ of a specified starting
date for Stage 2. But Douglas recorded his impression that the German
Chancellor was not set on seeking even this much, and that he might
be open to persuasion to drop references to any date. Moreover,
Chancellor Kohl said that he did not oppose discussion of GATT in
Rome. What he would not get into was negotiation of the Community
position. He said that he recognized the importance of the
Community’s offer on agriculture in the GATT and accepted that
December was a real deadline for the Uruguay round. He also
recognized that Germany would have to compromise. He would be
prepared to say tough things to the German farmers in due course —
but not yet. Apparently he implied to Douglas that there could be a
trade-off. If I was prepared to help him during the discussion of the
GATT, he might be able to help me during the discussion on the EMU
IGC. This, of course, turned out to be far from his real position.
I myself lunched with President Mitterrand at our embassy residence
in Rome on the Saturday. He could not have been more friendly or
amenable. I said that I was very disturbed at the Community’s failure
to agree a negotiating position on agriculture for the GATT
negotiations. I understood that agreement had very nearly been
reached after some sixteen hours of negotiations at the meeting of
Agriculture and Trade ministers the previous day but had been
blocked by the French. President Mitterrand said that this was all very
difficult, that agriculture must not be looked at in isolation and that
Europe — or more exactly France — should not be expected to make
all the concessions at the GATT talks. He asked me when I proposed to

raise the issue at the Council. I said that I would bring it up right at
the beginning. I would demand that the Council make clear that the
Community would table proposals within the next few days. Failure to
do so would be a signal to the world that Europe was protectionist.
President Mitterrand interjected that of course the Community was
protectionist: that was the point of it. Clearly, there was not much to
be gained by continuing this particular argument.
The French President did, however, agree with me — or so he
claimed — about the political union proposals. Indeed, he was highly
critical of some of M. Delors’s remarks and had no time at all for the
European Parliament. Somewhat more surprisingly, President
Mitterrand claimed that France, like Britain, wanted a common
currency, not a single currency. This was not true. But let me be
charitable — there may have been some confusion in translation. In
any case, I detected no hostility or wish to force me into a corner.
I was too well versed in the ways of the Community to take all this
bonhomie at face value. But even I was unprepared for the way things
went once the Council formally opened. Sig. Andreotti made clear
right at the beginning that there was no intention of discussing the
GATT. I spoke briefly and took them to task for ignoring this crucial
issue at such a time. I had hoped that someone other than me would
intervene. But only Ruud Lubbers did and he raised a mild protest.
Although something found its way into the communiqué, no one else
was prepared to speak up for these imminent and crucial negotiations.
Then M. Delors reported on his recent meeting with Mr Gorbachev.
To my surprise, he proposed that the Council should issue a statement
saying that the outer border of the Soviet Union must remain intact.
Again I waited. But no one spoke. I just could not leave matters like
this. I said that this was not for us in the Community to decide but for
the peoples and Government of the Soviet Union. I pointed out that
the Baltic States had in any case been illegally seized and incorporated
in the USSR. In effect, we were denying them their claim to
independence. M. Delors said that he had received an assurance from
Mr Gorbachev that the Baltic States would be freed, so we should not
become alarmed on that point. I came back at him, saying that we had
heard this sort of reassurance before from the Soviets; and, in any
case, what about the other nations of the Soviet Union who might
wish to leave it as well? At this point first Sr. Gonzalez, then President
Mitterrand and finally Chancellor Kohl intervened on my side and this
ill-judged initiative foundered.
But the atmosphere went from bad for worse. The others were
determined to insert in the communiqué provisions on political union,
none of which I was prepared to accept. I said that I would not preempt the debate in the IGC and had a unilateral observation to this
effect incorporated in the text. They also insisted on following the
German proposal that Stage 2 of monetary union should begin on 1
January 1994. I would not accept this either. I had inserted in the

communiqué the sentence:
The United Kingdom, while ready to move beyond Stage 1 through the
creation of a new monetary institution and a common Community currency,
believes that decisions on the substance of that move should precede
decisions on its timing.

They were not interested in compromise. My objections were heard
in stony silence. I now had no support. I just had to say no.
In three years the European Community had gone from practical
discussions about restoring order to the Community’s finances to
grandiose schemes of monetary and political union with firm
timetables but no agreed substance — all without open, principled
public debate on these questions either nationally or in European fora.
Now at Rome the ultimate battle for the future of the Community had
been joined. But I would have to return to London to win another
battle on which the outcome in Europe would depend — that for the
soul of the Parliamentary Conservative Party.
*
*

See pp. 405–6.

At Fontainebleau — see pp. 541–5.

The WEU was formed in 1948, principally for the purpose of military cooperation
between Britain, France and the Benelux countries. Germany and Italy joined it in the
1950s. The WEU predated NATO, which has entirely overshadowed it.
*

*
*
*
*
*

See pp. 413–4.

For a full discussion of this issue, see pp. 786–7.
See pp. 709–13.
See pp. 168–71.

See pp. 799–800, 842–6.

CHAPTER XXVI

The World Turned Right Side Up
The fall of communism in eastern Europe, the reunification of Germany
and the debate about the future of NATO — 1987–1990

OVERVIEW
The international scene in 1987 and 1988 was not so very different to
that before the general election. President Reagan was in the White
House, continuing the defence policies which time and again had
forced the Soviets to the negotiating table. Mr Gorbachev was
proceeding with increasingly far-reaching reforms in the Soviet Union
which, whether he liked it or not, would eventually open the
floodgates of democracy, if not prosperity. The West’s strategy of
defeating communism while ensuring our peace and security — a
strategy in which I believed with a passionate intensity and that I
sought to communicate when I went to eastern Europe — was
working. Its very success would mean that new questions about
Britain’s foreign relations and NATO’s defences would arise.
Yet even before this happened the familiar landscape changed in
another way I did not foresee. I had breathed a sigh of relief when
George Bush defeated his Democrat opponent in the US presidential
election, for I felt that it ensured continuity. But with the new team’s
arrival in the White House I found myself dealing with an
Administration which saw Germany as its main European partner in
leadership, which encouraged the integration of Europe without
seeming to understand fully what it meant and which sometimes
seemed to underestimate the need for a strong nuclear defence. I felt I
could not always rely as before on American co-operation. This was of
great importance at such a time. For by now — 1989 — the cracks in
the eastern European communist system were widening into crevices
and soon, wing by wing, the whole edifice fell away.
This welcome revolution of freedom which swept eastern Europe
raised great strategic issues, above all in the West’s relations with the
Soviet Union. (Indeed, what now was ‘the West’?) But I also saw at
once that it had profound implications for the balance of power in
Europe, where a reunified Germany would be dominant. There was a
new and different kind of ‘German Question’ which had to be
addressed openly and formally: I did so.
History teaches that dangers are never greater than when empires
break up and so I favoured caution in our defence and security policy.
Decisions about our security must, I argued, be made only after careful
reflection and analysis of the nature and direction of future threats.

Above all, they must be determined not by the desire to make a
political impression by arms control ‘initiatives’ but by the need
credibly to deter aggression.
For thinking and speaking like this I was mocked as the last Cold
Warrior — and an unreconstructed Germano-phobe to boot. In fact,
they said, I was a tiresome woman who might once have served a
purpose but who just could not or would not move with the times. I
could live with this caricature; there had been worse; but I also had no
doubt that I was right, that the unexpected did happen and that sooner
or later events would prove it. And, without claiming any foresight
about the precise timing of the fall of communism, I did find my basic
approach vindicated as 1990 wore on. This occurred in several ways.

First, Anglo-American relations suddenly lost their chill; indeed by
the end they had hardly been warmer. The protectionism of that
‘integrated’ Europe, dominated by Germany, which the Americans had
cheerfully accepted, even encouraged, suddenly started to arouse
American fears and threaten to cost American jobs. But this change of
heart was confirmed by the aggression of Saddam Hussein against
Kuwait which shattered any illusion that tyranny had been everywhere
defeated. The UN might pass its resolutions; but there would soon be a
full-scale war to fight. Suddenly a Britain with armed forces which had
the skills, and a government which had the resolve, to fight alongside
America, seemed to be the real European ‘partner in leadership’.
Then again the full significance of the changes in eastern Europe
began to be better understood. Having democratic states with market
economies, which were just as ‘European’ as those of the existing
Community, lining up as potential EC members made my vision of a
looser, more open Community seem timely rather than backward. It
also became clear that the courageous reforming leaders in eastern
Europe looked to Britain — and to me because of my anti-socialist
credentials — as a friend who genuinely wanted to help them, rather
than exclude them from markets (like the French) or seek economic
domination (like the Germans). These eastern European states were —
and are — Britain’s natural allies.
Further east in the USSR more disturbing developments made for a
reassessment of earlier euphoric judgements about the prospects for
the peaceful, orderly entrenchment of democracy and free enterprise.
In the Soviet Union I had won the respect both of the embattled Mr
Gorbachev and of his anti-communist opponents. I never
underestimated the fragility of the movement for reform; that was why
I spoke up for it — and for Mr Gorbachev — so forcefully in the West.
Events now increasingly suggested that a far-reaching political crisis in
the USSR might soon be reached. The implications of this for control
over nuclear weapons and indeed the whole arsenal which the Soviet
military machine had accumulated could not be ignored even by the
most enthusiastic western disarmers. In short, the world of the ‘new
world order’ was turning out to be a dangerous and uncertain place in

which the conservative virtues of hardened Cold Warriors were again
in demand. And so it was that in those last months and weeks of my
premiership, while domestic political pressures mounted, I found
myself once more at the centre of great international events with
renewed ability to influence them in Britain’s interests and in accord
with my beliefs.
VISIT TO WASHINGTON IN JULY 1987
On Thursday 16 July 1987 I flew into Washington to see President
Reagan. Our political fortunes at this time could not have been more
different. I had just won an election with a decisive majority,
enhancing my authority in international affairs. By contrast my old
friend and his Administration were reeling under the continuing
‘Irangate’ revelations. I found the President hurt and bemused by what
was happening. Nancy was spending her time listening to the cruel
and contemptuous remarks pouring out from the liberal media
commentators and telling him what was being said, which made him
still more depressed. Nothing wounds a man of integrity more than to
find his basic honesty questioned. It made me very angry. I was
determined to do what I could to help President Reagan ride out the
storm. It was not just a matter of personal loyalty — though it was
that too, of course: he also had eighteen months to serve as leader of
the most powerful country in the world and it was in all our interests
that his authority be undiminished. So I set about using my interviews
and public statements in Washington to get across this message. For
example, I told the interviewer on CBS’s Face the Nation:
Cheer up. Cheer up. Be more upbeat. America is a strong country with a
great president, a great people and a great future.

Our embassy was besieged by telephone calls of congratulation. My
remarks also touched another grateful audience. On Monday evening
— after I arrived back in London — I received a telephone call from
the President who wanted to thank me for what I had said. He was in
a Cabinet meeting and at one point he put down the receiver and told
me to listen. I heard loud and long applause from the Cabinet
members.
My main business in Washington, though, had been to discuss the
implications for our future defence of the INF treaty which would be
signed by Presidents Reagan and Gorbachev in December. I had
always had mixed feelings about the INF ‘zero option’. On the one
hand, it was a great success to have forced the Soviets to withdraw
their SS-20 missiles by deploying our Cruise and Pershing. But, on the
other, the removal of our intermediate-range land-based missiles
would have two undesirable effects. First, it threatened precisely what
Helmut Schmidt had wanted to avoid when he originally urged NATO
to deploy them: namely the decoupling of Europe from NATO. It could

then be argued, as in the 1970s, that in the last resort the United
States would not use nuclear weapons to deter a conventional Warsaw
Pact attack on Europe. This argument would boost the always-present
tendency to German neutralism — a tendency which it had been the
long-standing Soviet objective to magnify wherever possible. Second,
the INF ‘zero option’ also cast doubt on — though as I always argued it
did not in fact undermine — the NATO strategy of ‘flexible response’.
That strategy depended on the ability of the West to escalate its
response to Soviet aggression through each stage of conventional and
nuclear weapons. The removal of the intermediate-range missiles
might be argued to create a gap in that capability. It followed that
NATO must have other nuclear weapons, stationed on German soil,
which would be a credible deterrent and that those weapons be
modernized and strengthened where necessary. It was this question —
the avoidance of another ‘zero’ on Short-Range Nuclear Forces (SNF)
— which was to divide the alliance so seriously in 1988–9.
The main points I now made to the President in Washington were
the need to allocate submarine-launched Cruise missiles and additional
F1-11 aircraft to the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe to
compensate for the withdrawal of Cruise and Pershing and the need to
resist pressure from the Germans for early discussion of reductions of
SNF in Europe. I also wanted to see an upgraded and longer-range
Follow-On to LANCE missile (FOTL) developed by the Americans and
deployed by the mid-1990s, and a Tactical Air to Surface Missile
(TASM) to replace our free-fall bombs. On these matters relating to the
strengthening of our SNF the President and I saw eye to eye. Where I
did agree with the Germans — but found myself unable to convince
the Americans — was that I would have liked to retain the old German
Pershing 1A ballistic missiles for the rest of their natural life (a few
years), not including them as part of the INF package. But it was the
future of SNF that to my mind was the most crucial element in our
nuclear deterrence; and it certainly proved the most controversial.
DISCUSSIONS WITH MR GORBACHEV IN DECEMBER 1987
Britain’s own security interests were closely bound up with US-Soviet
arms negotiations. As regards SNF, these weapons were a vital
protection for our troops stationed in Germany. Discussions between
the two great powers about strategic nuclear weapons were also of
direct interest to us insofar as they affected the position of our Trident
nuclear deterrent. More generally, I never ceased to believe in the
importance of nuclear weapons as a means of deterring conventional,
not just nuclear, war — the one issue on which I knew I could not take
the Reagan Administration’s soundness for granted.
So although I had no intention of allowing myself to become a kind
of broker between the Americans and the Soviets, I was delighted
when Mr Gorbachev accepted my invitation to stop over at Brize

Norton on his way to the United States to sign the INF Treaty. This
would give me an opportunity to gauge his thinking before his
meeting with President Reagan and to tackle him on other issues, such
as human rights and regional conflicts, on which I thought I could
exert beneficial influence. The Americans had specifically asked me to
press Mr Gorbachev on Afghanistan, where it was clear he was trying
to find a way of pulling Soviet forces out of that disastrous venture.
Within the Soviet Union there were mixed signs. Mr Gorbachev had
brought his ally Mr Yakovlev into the Politburo; but — in a move
which was to have enormous long-term consequences — his one-time
protégé, Boris Yeltsin, who had been brought in as head of the
Moscow Party as an incorruptible radical reformer, had been publicly
humiliated. Within the Soviet leadership, apart from Mr Gorbachev
himself, it still seemed that probably only Foreign minister
Shevardnadze and Mr Yakovlev were fully committed to the
Gorbachev reforms.
At the start of our talks I brought out my copy of Mr Gorbachev’s
book, Perestroika, which seemed to please him. It prompted a long
description of the difficulties he was facing in bringing about the
changes he wanted. In the language of the Soviets — faithfully
reflected in the language of the western media — the opponents of
perestroika were usually called ‘conservatives’. I told him how irritating
I found this and said that I wanted nothing to do with Mr Gorbachev’s
‘conservatives’: they could hardly be more different from mine. Then
we got down to the detailed discussions on arms control. There was
not much to say now about INF and it was the projected START
Agreement,* which would lead to cuts in strategic nuclear weapons, on
which we focused. There were still large differences between the two
sides as regards definition and verification. I also repeated my
determination to keep nuclear weapons, which Mr Gorbachev
described as my preferring to ‘sit on a powder keg rather than an easy
chair’. I countered by reminding him of the large superiority which the
Soviets enjoyed in conventional and chemical forces. Then I raised
Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and the human rights issue,
suggesting that any action he took on these would be likely to assist
the US Administration in overcoming opposition in the Senate to the
INF Treaty. But I made no headway: he said that a solution in
Afghanistan would be easier if we stopped supplying the rebels with
arms and that human rights was a matter for the particular country
involved. (It was this sort of attitude which had already created a very
bad impression in the United States as a result of Mr Gorbachev’s
remarks about human rights in an interview with NBC.) There was
nothing I could do on this occasion to change his mind.
I ended our discussion by saying that I hoped that the Gorbachevs
would return for a full visit next year and he said that he was keen to
accept. In spite of his tetchiness over human rights, it was a vigorous,
enjoyable and even rather jolly occasion. We had lunch in the officers’

mess at which we were joined by Ken Baker and Raisa Gorbachev who
had been visiting a local school, meeting the children and teachers and
watching a Nativity play. On one particular matter, however, the
Christmas spirit did not prevail. Biding my time and waiting until the
Soviet interpreter was out of earshot, I asked Mr Gorbachev, who had
been reciting for me a Russian folk-song in front of the Christmas tree
in the foyer, whether he would let Oleg Gordievsky’s family out of the
Soviet Union to join him in Britain. He pursed his lips and said
nothing: the answer was all too clear.
When I got back to London I telephoned President Reagan to let him
know about our discussions. I told him what I had said on Afghanistan
and arms control. I also said that though the President must be
prepared to tackle Mr Gorbachev on human rights he should also be
prepared for a sharp reaction. President Reagan said that he expected
some tough sessions with Mr Gorbachev but that I had clearly softened
him up. He also asked me if I thought that he should try to get on first
name terms with the Soviet leader. I advised him to go carefully on
this, because although I found Mr Gorbachev friendly and open he was
also quite formal, something which the whole rigid Soviet system
encouraged.
NATO SUMMIT IN BRUSSELS, MARCH 1988
In fact, the Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Washington was a success.
The INF Treaty was agreed and a further summit in Moscow in the
first half of 1988 was arranged in principle at which the treaty would
be signed and possibly agreement reached on a START Treaty as well.
In February 1988 Mr Gorbachev announced that Soviet withdrawal
from Afghanistan would begin in May. We were clearly moving into
new territory and it seemed to me the right time to take our bearings
at a NATO summit. The first NATO heads of government summit for
six years — incidentally, the first attended by a French president for
twenty-two years — was scheduled for March in Brussels.
It was clear from the start that the West Germans were likely to be
the main source of difficulty. Mr Gorbachev had launched a very
successful propaganda drive to win over German opinion to a
denuclearized Germany. Within the Federal German Government, I
knew that Chancellor Kohl was still fundamentally sound on the need
to avoid a ‘third zero’ and denuclearization. Herr Genscher, the
Federal Foreign minister, by contrast, was not. Chancellor Kohl
insisted on NATO adherence to what was called its ‘comprehensive
concept’ — that is, regarding the different elements of defence
strategy, of which SNF was one, as a whole. Within this
‘comprehensive concept’ he was prepared to support measures agreed,
after proper study by the alliance as necessary, to maintain flexible
response; but he had said publicly in Washington that there was no
present need to make a decision on SNF modernization. It was possible

for the Americans and us to take account of German sensitivities in the
NATO communiqué while still maintaining the right stance both on
the military doctrine and modernization of nuclear weapons.
Consequently, I was not at all displeased by the wording which
resulted. The heads of government agreed on: ‘a strategy of deterrence
based on an appropriate mix of adequate and effective nuclear and
conventional forces which will continue to be kept up to date where
necessary’. That was enough.
After the Brussels summit officially broke up I met President Reagan
to discuss the outcome. I told him that I thought the summit had been
a great success because Britain and the United States had stood
together. This demonstration of NATO’s unity would be helpful to him
when he went to Moscow to meet Mr Gorbachev in May. I regretted
that it had not proved possible to get the Germans to accept explicitly
that negotiations to reduce shorter-range nuclear weapons in Europe
should only take place after parity on conventional weapons and a ban
on chemical weapons had been achieved. But I said that it was quite
clear to me that these were in fact the only circumstances in which
NATO should negotiate on short-range systems. President Reagan said
that he entirely agreed and that NATO could not go any further down
this road until these conditions had been met. We were equally in
accord on the approach to a START Agreement. I said that though I
supported START as a goal it was more important to get the right
agreement than to have it quickly. The President said that he too was
being cautious in his public comments. He did not want people to say
that the Moscow summit was a failure if no START Agreement could
be signed. He also recognized that the START negotiations would be
far more complex than those on INF, particularly as regards
verification. I left Brussels reassured that the President and I were at
one as we faced up to all the difficult and complicated arms control
negotiations which would now ensue.
PRESIDENT REAGAN’S VISIT TO LONDON, JUNE 1988
President Reagan was as good as his word when he went to Moscow.
Although the INF Treaty was signed there was tough negotiation and
no compromise on START, where the Soviets wanted the United States
to have Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCMs) included in the
agreement. But, as with my own visit in 1987, it was the opportunity
for President Reagan and the Russian people to meet one another face
to face which was probably of greatest importance. He told me when
he came to London on Thursday 2 June, on his way back from
Moscow, how moved he had been by the huge, welcoming crowds
there. The only thing which had upset him was the brutal way in
which the KGB had dealt with the people who wanted to approach
him. I told him that now the Russians had seen for themselves the sort
of person he was it would be that much more difficult for the Soviet

authorities to convince them that the United States was a dangerous
enemy. He had given high prominence to human rights matters —
particularly to freedom of worship — when he was in the Soviet Union
and I said how right I thought he had been to do this. The President
also told me about the difficult arms control talks. He said he had been
determined not to give an inch on SDI and he was not going to be
rushed on START. In the meantime, NATO must move ahead with
modernization of its short-range nuclear forces and the West Germans
must be persuaded to approach this in a positive way. He would
continue to insist that a balance had to be achieved in conventional
forces in Europe before there could be negotiations to remove shortrange nuclear weapons.
The President spoke to a large City and diplomatic audience at
Guildhall the next day. It was a vintage performance and one of some
significance in the light of later events. He harked back to the speech
he had made to Members of Parliament in 1982 in which he had
enunciated what came to be called the ‘Reagan Doctrine’.* Neither he
nor I knew how close we were to its triumphant vindication; but what
was clear was that great advances had been made in the ‘crusade for
freedom’ we had been fighting. It was now time to restate the cause,
which was as much spiritual as political or economic. As the President
put it:
Our faith is in a higher law … we hold that humanity was meant, not to be
dishonoured by the all-powerful state, but to live in the image and likeness
of Him who made us.

VISIT TO POLAND, NOVEMBER 1988
Just five months later — in November 1988 — I visited Poland. If
anyone had wanted a demonstration of the value of President Reagan’s
vision he would have found it in that country, where Catholic faith,
national consciousness and economic frustration had come together to
expose the empty sterility of Marxism and shake the foundations of
communist rule. I was determined to accept the invitation I had earlier
received from General Jaruzelski to go to Poland. I always felt the
greatest affection and admiration for this nation of indomitable
patriots, whose traditions and distinctive identity the Prussians,
Austrians and Russians (in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries)
and the Nazis and communists (in the twentieth century) had sought
vainly to extinguish. I could not forget the Polish airmen who had
fought with the RAF against Nazism, and how a war begun over the
freedom of Poland had ended leaving them trapped under tyranny.
But, for all that, these were diplomatically treacherous waters I was
entering; and I knew it.
My aim in going to Poland was to continue that strategy towards the
eastern bloc countries which I had first begun in Hungary in 1984. I
wanted to open up these countries — their governments and peoples

— to western influence and to exert pressure for respect for human
rights and for political and economic reform. But Poland’s recent past
demonstrated how dependent events in such countries were on the
intentions of the Soviet Union. Whether one regarded General
Jaruzelski as a patriot stepping in to prevent worse things befalling his
fellow countrymen or just as a Soviet puppet, the circumstances under
which martial law was imposed and Solidarity crushed in 1981 were
an unforgettable lesson in the reality of power politics. Now the
political and economic bankruptcy of the Jaruzelski Government was
again apparent and its authority challenged by a revived Solidarity.
The role of the West — above all of a visiting western leader — was to
give heart to the anti-communists, while urging on them a carefully
calculated response to the opportunities they had to improve
conditions and increase their influence; and in dealings with the
Government it must be to combine straight talking about the need for
change with an attitude which avoided outright and counterproductive
conflict. It would not be an easy task.
For their part, the authorities were determined to make it harder
still. On the eve of my visit the Government announced their intention
to close the Lenin Shipyard at Gdansk, the home of Solidarity. It was a
trap and one no less dangerous for being clumsy. The communists
hoped that I would be forced to welcome the closure of uneconomic
plant and to condemn Solidarity’s resistance to it on the grounds of
‘Thatcherite’ economics. Some commentators fully expected me to fall
for this. For example, a leader in The Times on the eve of my visit
noted:
The Prime Minister sets out today on a visit many will say she should not be
making. Her trip to Poland was always a questionable proposition, capable
of being interpreted as a gesture of succour to the Jaruzelski regime. Now it
is doubly so.

In fact, even the official published figures suggested that although
the Lenin Shipyard was in a very weak economic position it was not
making the greatest ‘losses’, which clearly implied that the decision to
single it out had been politically not economically motivated. Anyway,
since 90 per cent of the work at the shipyard was done for the Soviet
Union, its viability depended on little more than the exchange rate
between the rouble and the zloty. Where there is no real market there
can be no real estimates of ‘profit’ and ‘loss’. But there was far more to
it than that. I was convinced that you cannot expect people to
shoulder the kind of economic responsibility which would be expected
in a western economy unless they are granted the freedoms we expect
in a western society.
In the light of these manoeuvrings I was glad that from the
beginning I had insisted that there should be an unofficial as well as
an official side to my visit. I was not prepared to be prevented from
meeting Lech Walesa and the leading opponents of the regime. To his
credit, I felt, General Jaruzelski did not raise objections to my doing

so. Otherwise, of course, I would indeed have run the risk of
unwittingly serving the cause of communist propaganda.
In planning my visit I had consulted the Pope whose own visit there
in June 1987 had provided the main impetus for the revival of
Solidarity and the pressure for reform. It was clear that the Vatican
thought my visit could do good but also that the Church was
proceeding with great caution — a caution which was even more
evident when on the first day of my visit I had a meeting with
Cardinal Glemp.
In preparing my Polish trip there was another matter on which I felt
I must consult a wise authority and that was what I should wear. A
Polish lady who served me at Aquascutum said that green was the
colour which represented hope in Poland. So green was the colour of
the suit I chose.
My first official meeting in Warsaw on the evening of Wednesday 2
November was with the recently appointed Polish Prime Minister, Mr
Rakowski. He was not an impressive or persuasive advocate of the line
the Polish Government was taking about the Lenin Shipyard, though
he did his best. He said how much he agreed with my public
statements about the need for economic reform and portrayed closure
of the shipyard as part of this process. In somewhat forced
‘Thatcherite’ tones he told me that rationalization was the only way to
extricate Poland from its crisis and that Poland’s great weakness
historically had been lack of consistency, which was something he was
determined to change. I replied that going from a centralized economy
to one based on private enterprise and competition was immensely
difficult. But it was not just a matter of changing economic policies.
There had to be personal, political and spiritual change. Under
communism, people were like birds in a cage: even when you opened
the door, they were afraid to go out. The vital task facing his
Government, I said, was to take the Polish people with it in making
the changes; and the problem was that there was no political
mechanism for consulting them and allowing them to express their
views. The difference between the situation I had faced in 1979 and
that which confronted Mr Rakowski was that I had been
democratically elected — and twice re-elected — to carry out the
changes required.
Later that evening I met a number of opponents of the regime and
learnt a little more about its shortcomings. I knew that the communists
had never managed to achieve the scale of collectivization of
agriculture in Poland which they had elsewhere and that this —
alongside the influence of the Catholic Church — had given the Poles
a degree of independence which was unique in a communist country. I
said to those present that since they at least had the land they must be
doing quite well. No, they said, this was not so. Did I not realize that
the state directed most of the seed, fertilizer, tractors and other
equipment — not least spare parts — to the collective farming sector?

The authorities also controlled prices and distribution. Under these
circumstances the benefits of ownership were limited. In effect,
socialism, which is only a less developed form of communism, was
doing its usual work of impoverishment and demoralization. I later
raised the subject with Mr Rakowski, who did not seriously dispute the
facts.
On Thursday afternoon I had my first real taste of Poland — the
Poland which the communists had tried and failed to destroy. I visited
the church of St Stanislaw Kostka in the north of Warsaw where Father
Jerzy Popieluszko had preached his anti-communist sermons until in
1984 he was abducted and murdered by members of the Polish
Security Services. (I also went to talk in their home to Father
Popieluszko’s parents, who were grief stricken but immensely proud of
their son.) The church itself was overflowing with people of every age
who had come out to see me and on my arrival they broke into a
Polish hymn. In Father Popieluszko they had evidently found a martyr,
and I came away in little doubt that it was his creed rather than that
of his murderers which would prevail in Poland.
I said as much to General Jaruzelski when I met him for talks later.
The General had spoken for one and three-quarter hours without
interruption about his plans for Poland. In this, at least, he was a
typical communist. He even said that he admired the trade union
reforms I had put through in Britain. When he finished I pointed out
that people in Britain did not have to rely on trade unions as a means
of expressing their political views because we had free elections. I had
just experienced the power of the Solidarity movement in that church
in northern Warsaw. I said that, as a politician, all my instincts told
me that this was far more than a trade union — it was a political
movement whose power could not be denied. The Government was
right to recognize that it had to talk to Solidarity and I hoped that the
Solidarity leaders would accept its invitation.
The next day, Friday, was one I shall never forget. I flew up to
Gdansk in the early morning to join General Jaruzelski in laying a
wreath at the Westerplatte, which saw the first fighting between the
Poles and the invading Germans in 1939. It was a bleak peninsula
above the bay of Gdansk and the wind was bitter; the ceremony lasted
half an hour. I was pleased to get aboard and into the cabin of the
small naval ship which was to take me down the river to Gdansk itself.
I changed out of my black hat and coat into emerald green and then
went back up on deck. The scenes at the arrival of our boat at Gdansk
shipyard were unbelievable. Every inch of it seemed taken up with
shipyard workers waving and cheering.
After a walkabout in old Gdansk itself I was driven to the hotel
where Lech Walesa and his colleagues came up to see me in my room.
He had a somewhat ambiguous status at this time, being under a sort
of liberal house arrest, and had been brought to the hotel, ironically
enough, by Polish Security Police. I gave him the present I had

brought with me — some fishing tackle, for he was a great fisherman
— and we departed again for the shipyard. Again there were
thousands of shipyard workers waiting for me, cheering and waving
Solidarity banners. I laid flowers on the memorial to shipyard workers
shot by the police and army in 1970, and then went to the house of
Father Jankowski, Mr Walesa’s confessor and adviser, for a meeting
followed by lunch.
The Solidarity leaders were a mixture of workers and intellectuals.
Mr Walesa was in the former group, but he had a large physical
presence as well as a symbolic importance which allowed him to
dominate. He told me that Solidarity was disinclined to accept the
Government’s invitation to join in round-table talks, believing —
probably rightly — that the purpose was to divide and if possible
discredit the opposition. Solidarity’s goal he described as ‘pluralism’,
that is a state of affairs in which the Communist Party was not the sole
legitimate authority. What struck me, though, was that they did not
have a specific plan of action with immediate practical objectives.
Indeed, when I said that I thought that Solidarity should attend the
talks and submit its own proposals in the form of a detailed agenda
with supporting papers my hosts looked quite astonished.
Over lunch — one of the best game stews I have ever tasted — we
argued through together what their negotiating stance might be and
how in my final discussions with the Polish Government I could help.
We decided that the most important point I could make to General
Jaruzelski was that Solidarity must be legalized. De facto recognition
was not enough. Throughout I was repeatedly impressed by the
moderation and eloquence of Mr Walesa and his colleagues. At one
point I said: ‘you really must see that the Government hears all this.’
‘No problem’, replied Mr Walesa, pointing up to the ceiling; ‘our
meetings are bugged anyway.’
After lunch it was suggested that I might like to look around the
nearby church of St Brygida. To my delighted astonishment, when Mr
Walesa and I entered I found the whole church packed with Polish
families who rose and sang the Solidarity anthem ‘God give us back
our free Poland.’ I could not keep the tears from my eyes. I seemed to
have shaken hundreds of hands as I walked around the church. I gave
a short emotional speech and Lech Walesa spoke too. As I left there
were people in the streets crying with emotion and shouting ‘thank
you, thank you’ over and over again. I returned to Warsaw with
greater determination than ever to do battle with the communist
authorities.
In my final meeting with General Jaruzelski that afternoon I kept
my word to Solidarity. I told him that I was grateful that he had put
no obstacle in the way of my visit to Gdansk — though it has to be
said that the authorities had put on a total news black-out about it
both before and afterwards. I said how impressed I had been by
Solidarity’s moderation. If they were good enough to attend round-

table discussions they were also good enough to be legalized. General
Jaruzelski gave no impression of being prepared to budge. I repeated
that I did not believe that Solidarity could be ignored, indeed any
attempt to ignore them would court disaster. It was a chilly though
good-tempered discussion. General Jaruzelski was in any case a
slightly awkward interlocutor until you got to know him: his dark
glasses and his oddly rigid posture (the result of back trouble) made
him seem rather remote. But I did not underrate his intelligence — nor
his connections, for I knew that he was close to Mr Gorbachev. The
proof that the General was a Pole and not just a communist was that
just before my aeroplane was about to leave, in an unscheduled
appearance his car screamed to a halt beside the aircraft and the
General leapt out with a huge bouquet of flowers. Not even Marxism
could suppress Polish gallantry.
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION
A fortnight later I was back in Washington as President Reagan’s last
official guest. This gave me the chance of discussions with Presidentelect Bush. Mr Bush was slowly putting his Administration team
together. On this occasion I also met Dan Quayle, the Vice-Presidentelect — who for all the cruel mockery to which he was subject I
always found very well briefed and with a good political sense — and
also future Secretary of State Jim Baker, whose views I shall mention
shortly. Both the outgoing President and the President-elect spoke of
the importance of dealing with the US budget deficit which had fallen
for four years but which was still a problem. This inevitably raised a
question mark over defence, so I was keen to restate to Mr Bush my
views about SNF and the great significance I attached to the
continuation of the SDI programme.
I had always found Vice-President Bush easy to get on with and I
felt that he had performed good service to America in keeping the
Reagan Administration in touch with European thinking. He was one
of the most decent, honest and patriotic Americans I have met. He had
great personal courage, as his past record and his resilience in
campaigning showed. But he had never had to think through his
beliefs and fight for them when they were hopelessly unfashionable as
Ronald Reagan and I had had to do. This meant that much of his time
now was taken up with reaching for answers to problems which to me
came quite spontaneously, because they sprang from my basic
convictions.
I later learned that President Bush was sometimes exasperated by
my habit of talking nonstop about issues which fascinated me and felt
that he ought to have been leading the discussion. More important
than all of this perhaps was the fact that, as President, George Bush
felt the need to distance himself from his predecessor: turning his back
fairly publicly on the special position I had enjoyed in the Reagan

Administration’s counsels and confidence was a way of doing that.
This was understandable; and by the time of my last year in office we
had established a better relationship. By then I had learned that I had
to defer to him in conversation and not to stint the praise. If that was
what was necessary to secure Britain’s interests and influence I had no
hesitation in eating a little humble pie.
Unfortunately, even then the US State Department continued to put
out briefing against me and my policies — particularly on Europe —
until the onset of the Gulf crisis made them hastily change their
stance. To some extent the relative tilt of American foreign policy
against Britain in this period may have been the result of the influence
of Secretary of State James Baker. Although he was always very
courteous to me, we were not close as the admirable George Shultz
and I had been. Yet that was not crucial. Rather, it was the fact that
Jim Baker’s many abilities lay in the area of ‘fixing’. He had had a
mixed record of this, having as US Treasury Secretary been responsible
for the ill-judged Plaza and Louvre Accords which brought ‘exchange
rate stability’ back to the centre of the West’s economic policies with
highly deleterious effects. Now at the State Department Jim Baker and
his team brought a similar, allegedly ‘pragmatic’ problem-solving
approach to bear on US foreign policy.
The main results of this approach as far as I was concerned were to
put the relationship with Germany — rather than the ‘special
relationship’ with Britain — at the centre. I would be the first to argue
that if one chose to ignore history and the loyalties it engenders such
an approach might appear quite rational. After all, there was some
danger that Germany — first under the spell of Mr Gorbachev and
later with the lure of reunification — might have moved away from
the western alliance towards neutralism. Once Germany was reunified
there was another argument — propagated by the French, but
swallowed by the US State Department too — that only a ‘united
Europe’ could keep German power responsibly in check and, more
positively, that a German-led ‘united Europe’ would allow the
Americans to cut back on the amount they spent on Europe’s defence.
Each of these arguments — the sort I could imagine being generated
by our own British foreign policy establishment — was false. The risk
of Germany loosening its attachment to the West was greatly
exaggerated. A ‘united Europe’ would augment, not check, the power
of a united Germany. Germany would pursue its interests inside or
outside such a Europe — while a Europe built on the corporatist and
protectionist lines implicit in the Franco-German alliance would
certainly be more antipathetic to the Americans than the looser Europe
I preferred. Finally, the idea that the Europeans — with the exception
of the British and possibly the French — could be relied on to defend
themselves or anyone else for that matter was frankly laughable. In
fact, the ties of blood, language, culture and values which bound
Britain and America were the only firm basis for US policy in the

West; only a very clever person could fail to appreciate something so
obvious. But this was the range of personal and political
considerations which affected US policy towards Britain as I tried to
pursue my threefold objectives of keeping NATO’s defences strong, of
ensuring that the Soviet Union did not feel so threatened as to march
into eastern Europe and of managing the effects of German
reunification.
NATO SPLIT ON SHORT-RANGE NUCLEAR FORCES (SNF)
At the end of 1988 I could foresee neither the way in which AngloAmerican relations would develop nor the scale of the difficulties with
the Germans over SNF. My basic position on Short-Range Nuclear
Weapons was that they were essential to NATO’s strategy of flexible
response. Any potential aggressor must know that if he were to cross
the NATO line he might be met with a nuclear response. If that fear
was removed he might calculate that he could mount a conventional
attack that would reach the Atlantic seaboard within a few days. And
this, of course, was the existing position. But once land-based
intermediate-range nuclear weapons were removed, as the INF Treaty
signed in Washington in December 1987 took effect, the land-based
short-range missiles became all the more vital. So, of course, did the
sea-based intermediate missiles.
At the Rhodes European Council in early December 1988 I discussed
arms control with Chancellor Kohl. I found him quite robust. He was
keen for an early NATO summit which would help him push through
agreement within his Government on the ‘comprehensive concept’ for
arms control. I agreed that the sooner the better. We must take
decisions on the modernization of NATO’s nuclear weapons by the
middle of the year, in particular on the replacement of LANCE.
Chancellor Kohl said that he wanted both of these questions out of the
way before the June 1989 European elections.
By the time of the next Anglo-German summit in Frankfurt the
political pressure on the German Chancellor had increased further and
he had begun to argue that a decision on SNF was not really necessary
until 1991–2.
A week before I went to Frankfurt I had talked through the problem
with Jim Baker over lunch at Chequers. I told him that I still
considered that Chancellor Kohl was a courageous man and a strong
supporter of the United States: the problem was Hans-Dietrich
Genscher, who normally favoured a softer, more accommodating
approach to the Soviets. I predicted that a number of other
governments would be inclined to waver on SNF, because the opinion
polls showed that people no longer believed in the Soviet threat. It
was therefore vital that the United States and Britain should stand
firm. Jim Baker said he very much agreed with my line. The
Administration needed an assurance on deployment or it would not

get funding from Congress to develop a successor to LANCE. But he
wondered whether the price of German agreement would have to be
the acceptance of vague language on negotiations on SNF. I replied
that though there was scope for NATO to make unilateral reductions in
its holdings of nuclear artillery, we could not negotiate on SNF
without getting trapped into another ‘zero’. Jim Baker was clearly
more anxious about handling German sensitivities than I was, but I
still believed that we saw things in the same way.
Consequently, when I met Chancellor Kohl in Frankfurt I was quite
direct. I said that in putting the case for SNF to his people he should
simply ask the fundamental question whether they valued their
freedom. Freedom for the German people had started on the day the
Second World War had ended and NATO had preserved it for forty
years. The Soviet Union continued to represent a military threat.
Britain, Germany and the United States represented the real strength
of NATO. I understood his difficulties in dealing with German public
opinion but I believed that he and I were fundamentally in agreement.
NATO had to modernize its weapons, otherwise the United States
would sooner or later start to withdraw its troops from Germany.
Britain and Germany together should give a lead. In spite of the
pressure the Federal Chancellor was under, I came away from
Frankfurt feeling that the agreed line on SNF might still hold.
Certainly, the Soviets were in no doubt about the strategic
importance of the decisions which would have to be made about SNF.
Mr and Mrs Gorbachev arrived at 11 o’clock at night on Wednesday 5
April in London for the visit which had had to be postponed the
previous December as a result of an earthquake in Armenia. I met
them at the airport and returned to the Soviet Embassy where the
number of toasts drunk suggested that the Soviet leader’s early
crackdown on vodka was not universally applicable. In my talks with
Mr Gorbachev I found him frustrated by — and surprisingly suspicious
of — the Bush Administration. I defended the new President’s
performance and stressed the continuity with the Reagan
Administration. But the real substance of our discussions related to
arms control. I raised directly with Mr Gorbachev the evidence which
we had that the Soviets had not been telling us the truth about the
quantity and types of chemical weapons which they held. He stoutly
maintained that they had. He then brought up the issue of SNF
modernization. I said that obsolete weapons did not deter and that
NATO’s SNF would certainly have to be modernized. The forthcoming
NATO summit would confirm this intention. Mr Gorbachev returned to
the subject in his speech at Guildhall which contained a somewhat
menacing section about the effect on East-West relations and arms
control talks more generally if NATO went ahead with SNF
modernization.
All this pressure was by now having an effect. In particular,
Chancellor Kohl was retreating. In April a new German position on

SNF modernization and negotiation was extensively leaked before any
of the allies — other than the Americans — were informed. The
German position paper did not rule out a ‘third zero’, did not call on
the Soviet Union unilaterally to reduce its SNF levels to those of NATO
and cast doubt on SNF modernization.
I had acrimonious discussions with Chancellor Kohl behind the
stage-managed friendliness of our meeting at Deidesheim at the end of
April.* Chancellor Kohl gave a lengthy justification for Germany’s
recent conduct. He wanted NATO to discuss a mandate for
negotiations on SNF, though he said he was absolutely opposed to a
‘third zero’. He said that it was simply not sustainable politically in
Germany to argue that those nuclear weapons which most directly
affected Germany should be the only category not subject to
negotiation.
I said that I would begin by reminding Chancellor Kohl of some of
the background. He had been the one who had originally proposed
that there should be an early NATO summit to take the decision on
modernization and I had supported him. I read out to him the joint
statement which we had issued at Frankfurt. We had not been
informed of the German Government’s new position until several days
after it had been leaked to the press. NATO had to have SNF and they
must be modernized, as he himself had agreed recently. We could not
become embroiled in SNF negotiations which would lead inexorably to
a ‘third zero’. I told Chancellor Kohl about the reports we had been
getting of the Soviet Union’s real views and intentions. They were
delighted that they had gained an advantage with the modernization
of their own SNF and that we were delaying ours. They were also
confident that they could influence opinion in West Germany in favour
of SNF negotiations. I repeated that Britain and the United States were
absolutely opposed to negotiations on SNF and would remain so. Our
present forces were an irreducible minimum if we were to sustain the
strategy of flexible response and they would in due course have to be
modernized. Even if a decision to deploy the Follow-On to LANCE
(FOTL) were postponed, there must be clear evidence at the
forthcoming summit of NATO support for the US development
programme. In fact, the German Government’s actions had put NATO
under severe strain.
Chancellor Kohl began to get agitated. He said he did not need any
lectures about NATO, that he believed in flexible response and
repeated his opposition to a ‘third zero’. But the fact was that Germany
was more affected than anyone else by SNF and that therefore German
interests should be given priority. I retorted that, contrary to what he
said, SNF did not affect only Germany. Our troops were on German
soil. It had never been possible to rely on all the NATO allies; there
were always weak links. But hitherto the United States, Britain and
Germany had constituted the real strength of NATO.

At this Chancellor Kohl became still more worked up. He said that
for years he had been attacked as the vassal of the Americans. Now he
was suddenly being branded a traitor. He repeated that he did not
believe that once the INF agreement had been reached you could resist
negotiations on SNF. But he would think again about what I had said
and would be in touch with the Americans about it. I reported on our
discussion in a message to President Bush, concluding that ‘provided
Britain and the United States remain absolutely firm, we can still
achieve a satisfactory outcome at the [NATO] summit’.
In the run up to the NATO summit the newspapers continued to
focus on splits in the alliance. This was particularly galling because we
should have been celebrating NATO’s fortieth anniversary and
highlighting the success of our strategy of securing peace through
strength. Apart from the Americans only the French fully agreed with
my line on SNF and in any case, not being part of the NATO integrated
command structure, they would not be of great importance in the final
decision. I minuted on Tuesday 16 May: ‘if we get a “no negotiations”
SNF section this will be reasonable, combined with a supportive piece
on SNF research.’ I was still quite optimistic.
Then on Friday 19 May I suddenly learnt that the American line had
shifted. They were now prepared to concede the principle of
negotiations on SNF. Jim Baker claimed in public that we had been
consulted about this US change of tack, but in fact we had not.
Without in any way endorsing the American text, which I considered
wrong-headed, I sent two main comments to the Americans. It should
be amended to make the opening of SNF negotiations dependent upon
a decision to deploy a successor to LANCE. It should include a
requirement of substantial reductions in Soviet SNF towards NATO
levels. Jim Baker replied that he doubted whether the Germans would
accept this. The attitude of Brent Scowcroft — the President’s National
Security Adviser — was sounder. But I could not tell what the
President’s own view would be. In any case, I now found myself going
to Brussels as the odd man out. Everyone else accepted the principle of
SNF negotiations, and the differences between them existed only on
the conditions to be met before these were held. I did not want any
negotiations at all. And, if there had to be any, I wanted tougher
conditions than those in the American text. Above all there must be no
fudged language on the ‘third zero’.
This was not like a European Council: it was important that we
demonstrated the unity of NATO if it was to be effective and so I felt
that compromise in some circumstances was a moral duty rather than
a matter of weakness. However, I put my case very strongly in the
speech I made. I said that I was profoundly sceptical whether
negotiations on SNF could possibly be to NATO’s benefit. I was
prepared to consider a text which would envisage such negotiations,
but only after an agreement for the reduction of conventional forces
had been reached and partially implemented. This, moreover, could

only be on the basis that another ‘zero’ was excluded.
In fact, at the last minute the Americans brought forward proposals
calling for conventional forces reductions and for not just further deep
cuts but accelerated progress in the CFE talks in Vienna, so that those
reductions could be accomplished by 1992 or 1993. This sleight of
hand permitted a compromise on SNF by enabling the Germans to
argue that the prospect of ‘early’ SNF negotiations was preserved.
However, I emphasized in my subsequent statement to the House of
Commons the fact that only after agreement had been reached on
conventional force reductions, and implementation of that agreement
was under way, would the United States be authorized to enter into
negotiations to achieve partial reductions in Short-Range Missiles. No
reductions would be made in NATO’s SNF until after the agreement on
conventional force reductions had been fully implemented.
I felt that I had done as much as was humanly possible — without
firm support from the United States for the line I really wanted — to
stop our sliding into another ‘zero’. I could live with the text which
resulted from the tough negotiations which took place in Brussels. But
I had seen for myself that the new American approach was to
subordinate clear statements of intention about the alliance’s defence
to the political sensibilities of the Germans. I did not think that this
boded well.
President Bush’s remarks in his speech in Mainz on 31 May 1989
about the Germans as ‘partners in leadership’ confirmed the way
American thinking about Europe was going. When the President came
to London he sought to deal with the problems those remarks had
caused by saying that we too were partners in leadership. But the
damage had been done. Now, as 1989 wore on, the march of events in
eastern Europe and the prospect of German reunification added a new
element, inclining the United States to take German issues still more
seriously.
THE FALL OF COMMUNISM IN EASTERN EUROPE IN 1989 AND ITS
IMPLICATIONS
In the late summer of 1989 the first signs appeared of the imminent
collapse of communism in eastern Europe. Solidarity won the elections
in early June in Poland and General Jaruzelski accepted the result: I
congratulated him on this when he came to London a few days later.
Liberalization proceeded in Hungary, which opened its borders to
Austria in September across which flooded East German refugees. The
haemorrhage of population from East Germany and demonstrations at
the beginning of October in Leipzig led to the fall of Erich Honecker.
The demolition of the Berlin Wall began on 10 November. The
following month it was the turn of Czechoslovakia. By the end of the
year Vaclav Havel, the dissident playwright who had been gaoled in
February, had been elected President of Czechoslovakia and the evil

Ceauşescus had been overthrown in Romania.
These events marked the most welcome political change of my
lifetime. But no matter how much I rejoiced at the overthrow of
communism in eastern and central Europe I was not going to allow
euphoria to extinguish either reason or prudence. I did not believe that
it would be easy or painless to entrench democracy and free
enterprise. Some of the liberalizing and liberated countries had
stronger traditions of freedom to draw upon than others. But it was
too soon to be sure precisely what sort of regimes would emerge.
Moreover, central and eastern Europe — still more the Soviet Union —
was a complicated patchwork of nations. Political freedom would also
bring ethnic disputes and challenges to frontiers, which might have
moved several times in living memory. War could not be ruled out.
The welcome changes which were happening had come about
because the West had remained strong and resolute — but also
because Mr Gorbachev and the Soviet Union had renounced the
Brezhnev doctrine. On the continued survival of a moderate, reforming
Government in the USSR would depend the future of the new
democracies. We had seen in the past — in 1956 in Hungary and 1968
in Czechoslovakia — what happened when democrats took to the
streets believing that the West would ultimately step in to help them
against the Soviets and then found themselves abandoned. It was too
early to assume that the captive nations were permanently free from
captivity: their Soviet captors could still turn ugly. It was therefore
essential to go carefully and avoid actions which would be deemed
provocative by either the Soviet political leadership or the military.
This led directly on to the third consideration — the future of
Germany. For nothing was more likely to stir up old fears in the Soviet
Union — fears which the hardliners would be anxious to exploit —
than the prospect of a reunited, powerful Germany, possibly with
renewed ambitions on its eastern flank.
THE GERMAN PROBLEM AND THE BALANCE OF POWER
There was — and still is — a tendency to regard the ‘German problem’
as something too delicate for well-brought-up politicians to discuss.
This always seemed to me a mistake. The problem had several
elements which could only be addressed if non-Germans considered
them openly and constructively. I do not believe in collective guilt: it
is individuals who are morally accountable for their actions. But I do
believe in national character, which is moulded by a range of complex
factors: the fact that national caricatures are often absurd and
inaccurate does not detract from that. Since the unification of
Germany under Bismarck — perhaps partly because national
unification came so late — Germany has veered unpredictably
between aggression and self-doubt. Germany’s immediate neighbours,
such as the French and the Poles, are more deeply aware of this than

the British, let alone the Americans; though the same concern often
leads Germany’s immediate neighbours to refrain from comments
which might appear insensitive. The Russians are acutely conscious of
all this too, though in their case the need for German credit and
investment has so far had a quiescent effect. But perhaps the first
people to recognize the ‘German problem’ are the modern Germans,
the vast majority of whom are determined that Germany should not be
a great power able to exert itself at others’ expense. The true origin of
German angst is the agony of self-knowledge.
As I have already argued, that is one reason why so many Germans
genuinely — I believe wrongly — want to see Germany locked in to a
federal Europe. In fact, Germany is more rather than less likely to
dominate within that framework; for a reunited Germany is simply too
big and powerful to be just another player within Europe. Moreover,
Germany has always looked east as well as west, though it is economic
expansion rather than territorial aggression which is the modern
manifestation of this tendency. Germany is thus by its very nature a
destabilizing rather than a stabilizing force in Europe. Only the
military and political engagement of the United States in Europe and
close relations between the other two strongest sovereign states in
Europe — Britain and France — are sufficient to balance German
power: and nothing of the sort would be possible within a European
super-state.
One obstacle to achieving such a balance of power when I was in
office was the refusal of France under President Mitterrand to follow
his and French instincts and challenge German interests. This would
have required abandoning the Franco-German axis on which he had
been relying and, as I shall describe, the wrench proved just too
difficult for him.
GERMAN REUNIFICATION
Initially, it also seemed likely that the Soviets would be strongly
opposed to the re-emergence of a powerful Germany, particularly one
reunited on the West’s terms and accompanied by the discrediting of
communism. Of course, the Soviets might have calculated that a
reunited Germany would return a left-of-centre government which
would achieve their long-term objective of neutralizing and
denuclearizing West Germany. (As it turned out — and perhaps with a
clearer idea than we had of the true feelings of the East German
people — the Soviets were prepared to sell reunification for a modest
financial boost from Germany to their crumbling economy.)
These matters were at the forefront of my mind when I decided to
arrange a stop-over visit in Moscow for talks with Mr Gorbachev on
my way back from the IDU Conference in Tokyo in September 1989.
In fact, my VC10 stopped first for refuelling in the Siberian town of
Bratsk. I had two hours of conversation with the local Communist

Party leaders over coffee in a chilly barn-like building. They seemed
enthusiastic about perestroika, but I found the conversation flagging
after an hour had been spent on the subject of the local beetroot crop.
Stardom came to the rescue. John Whittingdale came in to ask if Oleg,
the KGB guard outside the door, could have a signed photograph. I at
once obliged. My hosts conferred in rapid Russian and then said that
they too wanted signed photographs. The ice was broken.
In Moscow the following morning and over lunch Mr Gorbachev and
I talked frankly about Germany. I explained to him that although
NATO had traditionally made statements supporting Germany’s
aspiration to be reunited, in practice we were rather apprehensive.
Nor was I speaking for myself alone — I had discussed it with at least
one other western leader, meaning but not mentioning President
Mitterrand. Mr Gorbachev confirmed that the Soviet Union did not
want German reunification either. This reinforced me in my resolve to
slow up the already heady pace of developments. Of course, I did not
want East Germans — any more than I would have wanted anyone
else — to have to live under communism. But it seemed to me that a
truly democratic East Germany would soon emerge and that the
question of reunification was a separate one, on which the wishes and
interests of Germany’s neighbours and other powers must be fully
taken into account.
To begin with the West Germans seemed to be willing to do this.
Chancellor Kohl telephoned me on the evening of Friday 10 November
after his visit to Berlin and as demolition of the Berlin Wall began. He
was clearly buoyed up by the scenes he had witnessed: what German
would not have been? I advised him to keep in touch with Mr
Gorbachev who would obviously be very concerned with what was
happening. He promised to do so. Later that night the Soviet
Ambassador came to see me with a message from Mr Gorbachev who
was worried that there might occur some incident — perhaps an
attack on Soviet soldiers in East Germany or Berlin — which could
have momentous consequences.
However, instead of seeking to rein back expectations, Chancellor
Kohl was soon busily raising them. In a statement to the Bundestag he
said that the core of the German question was freedom and that the
people of East Germany must be given the chance to decide their own
future and needed no advice from others. That went for the ‘question
of reunification and for German unity too’. The tone had already
begun to change and it would change further — though in private
Foreign minister Genscher was still assuring Douglas Hurd that the
Germans wanted to avoid talk of reunification.
This was the background to President Mitterrand’s calling a special
meeting of Community heads of government in Paris* to consider what
was happening in Germany — where Egon Krenz, the new East
German leader who was, the Soviets had told me, a protégé of Mr
Gorbachev, was looking precarious. Before I went I sent a message to

President Bush reiterating my view that the priority should be to see
genuine democracy established in East Germany and that German
reunification was not something to be addressed at present. The
President later telephoned me to thank me for my message with which
he agreed and to say how much he was looking forward to the two of
us ‘putting our feet up at Camp David for a really good talk’.
Almost equally amiable was the Paris meeting on the evening of
Saturday 18 November. President Mitterrand opened by posing a
number of questions, including whether the issue of borders in Europe
should be open for discussion. Then Chancellor Kohl began. He said
that people wanted ‘to hear Europe’s voice’. He then obliged by
speaking for forty minutes. He concluded by saying that there should
be no discussion of borders but that the people of Germany must be
allowed to decide their future for themselves and that selfdetermination was paramount. After Sr. Gonzalez had intervened to no
great effect, I spoke.
I said that though the changes taking place were historic we must
not succumb to euphoria. The changes were only just beginning and it
would take several years to get genuine democracy and economic
reform in eastern Europe. There must be no question of changing
borders. The Helsinki Final Act must apply.* Any attempt to talk about
either border changes or German reunification would undermine Mr
Gorbachev and also open up a Pandora’s box of border claims right
through central Europe. I said that we must keep both NATO and the
Warsaw Pact intact to create a background of stability. Whatever
reservations Chancellor Kohl may have had were not voiced. Whether
he had already decided on his next move to accelerate the process of
reunification I do not know.
The following Friday — 24 November — I was discussing the same
issues at Camp David with President Bush — though not exactly ‘with
my feet up’. Although friendly enough, the President seemed
distracted and uneasy. I was very keen to persuade him of the
Tightness of my approach to what was happening in the crumbling
communist bloc. I reiterated much of what I had said in Paris about
borders and reunification and of the need to support the Soviet leader
on whose continuance in power so much depended. The President did
not challenge what I said directly but he asked me pointedly whether
my line had given rise to difficulties with Chancellor Kohl and about
my attitude to the European Community. It was also clear that we
differed on the priority which still needed to be given to defence
spending. The President told me about the budgetary difficulties he
faced and argued that if conditions in eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union had really changed, there must surely be scope for the West to
cut its defence spending. I said that there would always remain the
unknown threat which must be guarded against. Defence spending was
like home insurance in this respect. You did not stop paying the
premiums because your street was free from burglaries for a time. I

thought that the US defence budget should be driven not by Mr
Gorbachev and his initiatives but by the United States’ defence
interests. Perhaps I was insensitive to his difficulties with Congress. In
any case, the atmosphere did not improve as a result of our
discussions.
Shortly after my return to Britain I learned that without any
previous consultation with his allies and in clear breach of at least the
spirit of the Paris summit Chancellor Kohl had set out in a speech to
the Bundestag a ‘ten-point’ plan about Germany’s future. The fifth
point was the proposal of the development of ‘confederative structures
between the two states in Germany with the goal of creating a
federation’. The tenth point was that his Government was working
towards ‘unity, reunification, the reattainment of German state unity’.
The real question now was how the Americans would react. I did
not have to wait long to find out. In a press conference briefing Jim
Baker spelt out the American approach to German reunification which,
he said, would be based on four principles. Self-determination would
be pursued ‘without prejudice to its outcome’. Another element was
that Germany should not only remain in NATO — with which I
heartily agreed — but that it should be part of ‘an increasingly
integrated European Community’ — with which I did not. The third
point was that moves to unification should be peaceful, gradual and
part of a step-by-step process, which was fair enough. I entirely agreed
with the final point — that the principles of the Helsinki Final Act
particularly as they related to borders must be supported. What
remained to be seen, however, was whether the Americans were going
to give most weight to the notion of Germany’s future in an
‘integrated’ Europe or to the thought that reunification must only
come about slowly and gradually.
It was left to President Bush himself to provide the answer in his
speech at the NATO heads of government meeting staged at Brussels in
early December to hear his report on his talks with Mr Gorbachev in
Malta. He made an obviously carefully prepared statement on Europe’s
‘future architecture’, calling for a ‘new, more mature relationship’ with
Europe. He also restated the principles Jim Baker had laid out as
regards reunification. But the fact that the President placed such
emphasis on ‘European integration’ at a predominantly European
meeting in Brussels was immediately taken as a signal — which was
perhaps not far from the truth — that he was aligning America with
the federalist rather than my ‘Bruges’ goal of European development.
There was no reason for journalists, who knew perfectly well of the
direction of State Department background briefing, to take the
President’s remarks otherwise. The President telephoned me to explain
his remarks and say that they just related to the Single Market rather
than wider political integration. I hoped that they did — or that at
least from now on they would. The fact remained that there was
nothing I could expect from the Americans as regards slowing down

German reunification — and possibly much I would wish to avoid as
regards the drive towards European unity.
AN ANGLO-FRENCH AXIS?
If there was any hope now of stopping or slowing down reunification
it would only come from an Anglo-French initiative. Yet even were
President Mitterrand to try to give practical effect to what I knew were
his secret fears, we would not find many ways open to us. Once it was
decided that East Germany could join the European Community
without detailed negotiations — and I was resisting for my own
reasons treaty amendment and any European Community aid — there
was little we could do to slow down reunification via the Community’s
institutions. I placed some hopes in the framework offered by the ‘Four
Powers’ — Britain, France, the United States and the Soviet Union —
which were responsible for the security of Berlin. But with the United
States — and soon the Soviets too — ceasing to regard this as anything
other than a talking shop for discussion of the details of reunification,
this framework too was of limited use. The CSCE — on which I was to
develop my ideas the following year — would provide a basis for
restricting any unwelcome attempts to change borders in eastern
Europe as a whole; but it would not stand in the way of German
reunification. So the last and best hope seemed the creation of a solid
Anglo-French political axis which would ensure that at each stage of
reunification — and in future economic and political developments —
the Germans did not have things all their own way.
At the Strasbourg European Council in December 1989 President
Mitterrand and I — at his suggestion — had two private meetings to
discuss the German problem and our reaction to it. He was still more
concerned than I was. He was very critical of Chancellor Kohl’s ‘tenpoint’ plan. He observed that in history the Germans were a people in
constant movement and flux. At this I produced from my handbag a
map showing the various configurations of Germany in the past, which
were not altogether reassuring about the future. We talked through
what precisely we might do. I said that at the meeting he had chaired
in Paris we had come up with the right answer on borders and
reunification. But President Mitterrand observed that Chancellor Kohl
had already gone far beyond that. He said that at moments of great
danger in the past France had always established special relations with
Britain and he felt that such a time had come again. We must draw
together and stay in touch. It seemed to me that although we had not
discovered the means, at least we both had the will to check the
German juggernaut. That was a start.
Discussion at the official meetings of the Strasbourg Council was of
course very different in tone, although the Dutch Prime Minister Mr
Lubbers said at the heads of government dinner that he thought
Chancellor Kohl’s ‘ten-point’ plan would encourage reunification, that

there were dangers in talking about self-determination and that it was
better not to refer to one ‘German people’. This required some
courage. But it hardly deflected Chancellor Kohl, who said that
Germany had paid for the last war by losing one-third of its territory.
He was vague about the question of borders — too vague for my liking
— arguing that the Oder-Neisse line, which marked the border with
Poland, should not become a legal issue. He did not seem now or later
to understand the Polish fears and sensitivities.
I was due to meet President Mitterrand in January 1990 and I asked
for papers to be drawn up showing ways in which we could strengthen
Anglo-French co-operation. The French President had been to East
Berlin shortly before Christmas in order to assert France’s interests in
the future of Germany. But his public attitude hardly betrayed his
private thoughts and at his press conference there he claimed that he
was not ‘one of those who were putting on the brakes’. I hoped that
my forthcoming meeting with him might overcome this tendency to
schizophrenia.
Almost all the discussion I had with President Mitterrand at the
Elysée Palace on Saturday 20 January concerned Germany. Picking up
the President’s remarks in the margins of Strasbourg I said that it was
very important for Britain and France to work out jointly how to
handle what was happening in Germany. East Germany seemed close
to collapse and it was by no means impossible that we would be
confronted in the course of this year with the decision in principle in
favour of reunification. The President was clearly irked by German
attitudes and behaviour. He accepted that the Germans had the right
to self-determination but they did not have the right to upset the
political realities of Europe; nor could he accept that German
reunification should take priority over everything else. He complained
that the Germans treated any talk of caution as criticism of
themselves. Unless you were whole-heartedly for reunification, you
were described as an enemy of Germany. The trouble was that in
reality there was no force in Europe which could stop reunification
happening. He agreed with my analysis of the problems but he said he
was at a loss as to what we could do. I was not so pessimistic. I argued
that we should at least make use of all the means available to slow
down reunification. The trouble was that other governments were not
ready to speak up openly — nor, I might have added but did not, were
the French. President Mitterrand went on to say that he shared my
worries about the Germans’ so-called ‘mission’ in central Europe. The
Czechs, Poles and Hungarians would not want to be under Germany’s
exclusive influence, but they would need German aid and investment.
I said that we must not just accept that the Germans had a particular
hold over these countries, but rather do everything possible to expand
our own links there. At the end of the meeting we agreed that our
Foreign and Defence ministers should get together to talk over the
issue of reunification and also examine the scope for closer Franco-

British defence co-operation.
The fact that little or nothing in practical terms came of these
discussions between me and President Mitterrand about the German
problem reflected his basic unwillingness to change the direction of his
whole foreign policy. Essentially, he had a choice between moving
ahead faster towards a federal Europe in order to tie down the German
giant or to abandon this approach and return to that associated with
General de Gaulle — the defence of French sovereignty and the
striking up of alliances to secure French interests. He made the wrong
decision for France. Moreover, his failure to match private words with
public deeds also increased my difficulties. But it must be said that his
judgement that there was nothing we could do to halt German
reunification turned out to be right.
In February Chancellor Kohl — again without any consultation with
his allies — went to Moscow and won from Mr Gorbachev agreement
that ‘the unity of the German nation must be decided by the Germans
themselves.’ (The quid pro quo would soon become clear. In July at a
meeting in the Crimea the West German Chancellor agreed to provide
what must have seemed to the Soviets a huge sum, though they could
in fact have extracted much more, to cover the costs of providing for
the Soviet troops who would be withdrawn from East Germany. For
his part, Mr Gorbachev now finally agreed in public that the reunified
Germany should be part of NATO.)
On Saturday 24 February I had a three-quarters-of-an-hour
telephone conversation with President Bush. I broke with my usual
habit of trying to avoid detailed factual discussions over the telephone
and tried to explain to the President how I thought we should be
thinking about the future of a western alliance and a Europe which
contained a reunified Germany. I stressed the importance of ensuring
that a united Germany stayed within NATO and that United States
troops remained there. However, if all Soviet forces had to leave East
Germany that would cause difficulties for Mr Gorbachev and I thought
it best to allow some to stay for a transitional period without any
specific terminal date. I also said that we must strengthen the CSCE
framework, which would not only help avoid Soviet isolation but
would help balance German dominance in Europe. One had to
remember that Germany was surrounded by countries most of which it
had attacked or occupied on mainland Europe in the course of this
century. Looking well into the future, only the Soviet Union — or its
successor — could provide such a balance. President Bush, as I
afterwards learnt, failed to understand that I was discussing a longterm balance of power in Europe rather than proposing an alternative
alliance to NATO. It was the last time that I relied on a telephone
conversation to explain such matters.
Chancellor Kohl had managed to convey the worst possible
impression by his unwillingness to have a proper treaty to settle
Germany’s border with Poland. Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki,

whom I had first met in very different circumstances in Gdansk in
November 1988, discussed his fears with me when he came to London
in February 1990. I pressed the matter — though I received no real
response — when I met Chancellor Kohl at the start of an AngloGerman summit in London at the end of March. I also ensured that the
Poles received special status at the talks of the ‘two-plus-four’ (or as I
preferred to call it the ‘four-plus-two’ — that is the Berlin Four Powers
and the Two Germanies). Finally, and after much pressure, Chancellor
Kohl did agree to settle Germany’s border with Poland by a special
treaty signed in November 1990.
THE CSCE AND THE ‘ALLIANCE FOR DEMOCRACY’
One minor benefit which did come out of the saga of German
reunification was an enhanced role for the CSCE (Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe). I had begun by being very
sceptical of the whole Helsinki process. But whatever its shortcomings
at the height of the Cold War, it now provided a useful framework
within which at least some of the problems arising in the new
democratic Europe might be tackled. It could never take the place of
NATO which must remain the basis of our defence, whatever changes
in its strategy and priorities were required; though it did provide the
framework for the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) arms
negotiations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact which would lead to
the CFE agreement, signed at what turned out to be my final summit
in Paris in November 1990. The CSCE could not give the new
democracies the assurance of security which they wanted: they
continued to hanker after some sort of association agreement with
NATO.
But the CSCE did have three important advantages. First, it involved
both the Americans and the Soviet Union in Europe’s future. Europe
could never be stable without an American presence and commitment.
Second, the CSCE was well suited to be the forum for any discussions
of border disputes, although it would not be able to go beyond
conciliation to enforcement. (Enforcement should be a matter for
NATO, the UN or if necessary one or more countries under the
inevitable lead of the United States.) Third, I envisaged that, building
on the human rights content of the Helsinki principles, we should add
the complementary principles of private property and free markets.
We should use the CSCE summit in November to create the basis of a
‘great alliance for democracy [stretching] from the Atlantic to the
Urals and beyond’ — as I described it in my speech to the AngloGerman Königswinter Conference in Cambridge in March.
I returned to the theme in my speech at Aspen, Colorado on Sunday
5 August. At Aspen I set out what I described as the ‘fundamental
tenets of true democracy’. These were not just related to suffrage: I
pointed out that Britain was free long before a majority of the

population had the vote. Democracy, I contended, required the
limitation of the powers of government, a market economy, private
property — and the sense of personal responsibility without which no
such system could be sustained. I called for the CSCE summit to agree
on what I called a ‘European Magna Carta’ which would enshrine all
these basic rights, including the right to maintain one’s nationhood. I
urged closer association between east and west Europe. I also called
for the Soviet Union to be brought into the western economic system.
(These ideas were the basis of the Charter of Paris which I signed the
morning after I learned that I had failed to secure the size of majority I
needed in the first round of the Conservative Party leadership
election.)
THE SOVIET UNION — 1989–90
Throughout my last year in office doubts were increasingly raised
about the wisdom of supporting Mr Gorbachev in his reforms. But I
continued to do so and have no regrets. First, I am not by instinct
someone who throws over those I like and have shown themselves my
friends simply because their fortunes change. And though this may
have immediate disadvantages, in my experience it increases the
respect in which one is held by those with whom one has to do
business: respect is a powerful asset, as those in politics who fail to
inspire it might secretly agree. But second, and more important, it did
not seem to me that at the time anyone was better able than Mr
Gorbachev to push ahead with reform. I wanted to see the fall of
communism — indeed I wanted to see it not just in eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union but in every corner of the globe — but I wanted to
see this achieved peacefully. The two obvious threats to peace were a
takeover — covert or overt — by hardliners in the Soviet military or
the violent break-up of the Soviet Union. Throughout the summer of
1990 there were disturbing reports of possible rebellious activities
within the Soviet military. Their authenticity was never certain but
they carried some credibility. But it was the nationalities question —
that is the future of the Soviet Union itself — which was most difficult
for outsiders to assess.
I now believe that all of us in the West overestimated the degree to
which a Soviet Empire whose core was provided by Marxist ideology
and a communist nomenklatura — an empire constructed and bound
together by force — could survive the onset of political liberty.
Perhaps we listened too much to the diplomats and western experts
and too little to the emigrés. That said, I did not go along with much
of the thinking which characterized the British Foreign Office and US
State Department on the issue of nationalities or nationhood.
We were all quite clear, as it happens, about the special legal status
of the Baltic States: it was not a question of whether but of when they
must be allowed to go free. (I had a long-standing interest in their

future, having voted in 1967 against an agreement between the then
Labour Government and the Soviet Union to use the Baltic States’ gold
reserves — frozen in the Bank of England since the Soviets invaded
them in 1940 — to settle outstanding financial claims.) I warned the
Soviets about the severe consequences of the use of force against the
Baltic States when I saw Mr Gorbachev in June. But I urged the
greatest caution on President Landsbergis (of Lithuania) when I saw
him in London in November. And I pressed both sides to negotiate
throughout — though only on the clear understanding that the final
destination of the Baltic States was freedom.
The case of the other republics was less clear cut. Ukraine and
Byelorussia — by an ill-judged concession to Stalin in 1945 — were
actually members of the United Nations so they could perhaps claim a
somewhat different status too. I did not share the apparently hardheaded but in fact economically illiterate view that a state had to have
a certain population, or GDP, or range of natural resources to be
‘viable’: it was the spirit of the people and the general economic
framework created in order to harness it which would determine such
matters. Nor, in general, was I happy with the argument that it was for
us in the West to determine the future shape — or even existence — of
the USSR. Our duty lay in thinking about the consequences of future
developments there upon our own security. And it was this last
consideration which led me to go very cautiously. It is one thing to
expect a military super-power — even a sickly one like the Soviet
Union — to change its internal and external policies in order to
survive: it is quite another to expect it peacefully to commit hara-kiri.
When I was in Paris in November for the CSCE summit at a lunch for
heads of government I had been saying to President Iliescu of Romania
that in working out a negotiating position you must always be clear on
the stopping point — the point you would never concede. Mr
Gorbachev, who had been listening, leant across the table and said
that he agreed: his stopping point was the external perimeter of the
Soviet Union. I did not accept this — and, as I have mentioned, had
challenged the same view when relayed by M. Delors in Rome* — but
I took it seriously all the same.
The whole question of the future of the republics within the Soviet
Union had by 1990 become the main source of controversy in Soviet
political affairs. It was one of the subjects I had discussed with Mr
Gorbachev on my stop-over visit in Moscow the previous September.
He had just held a plenum on the nationalities question. There had
also been some significant changes in the Politburo. The long-time
communist leader in Ukraine, Mr Shcherbitsky, had left its ranks. Mr
Pugo, previously the Latvian Party Chief- and one of the future coup
leaders of 1991 — had been promoted to candidate membership of the
Politburo. Mr Kryuchkov, Chairman of the KGB — also a coup leader
— had been promoted to full membership. Mr Ryzhkov, with whom
Mr Gorbachev was on close personal terms but who was quite out of

his depth in dealing with the economy, remained as Prime Minister.
Over lunch in the Kremlin Mr Gorbachev had recalled how General de
Gaulle had once complained about the difficulties of ruling a country
which had 200 cheeses: how much more difficult it was to rule one
with 120 nationalities. ‘Especially when there is a shortage of cheese,’
chipped in Mr Albakin, the Deputy Prime Minister. And indeed
frustrations at the failure of economic reform were increasingly
expressed in national dissent as the months went by.
The emergence of Boris Yeltsin as a radical proponent of reform —
both political and economic — ought perhaps to have strengthened Mr
Gorbachev’s position. If the two of them had been able to sink their
differences and if Mr Gorbachev had been prepared to cut his links
with the Communist Party perhaps the impetus of reform might have
been renewed. But these were two ‘ifs’ too many. Their relations
remained bad and Mr Gorbachev remained a communist to the end.
There was a strong tendency in western circles to write off Mr
Yeltsin as nothing more than a buffoon. I could not believe that this
judgement — if such it can be called — was correct. But I wanted to
see for myself. Consequently, although I was careful to notify Mr
Gorbachev in advance and to make it clear that I was receiving Mr
Yeltsin in the way that I would a Leader of the Opposition, I
enthusiastically agreed to meet him when he came to London on the
morning of Friday 27 April 1990. The briefing I had received about Mr
Yeltsin sums up the attitude which was then prevalent. In this he was
described as ‘a controversial figure’ because he had been the only
member of the Party Central Committee to vote against the Draft
Platform, arguing that it was the Communist Party’s long monopoly of
power which had brought the USSR to its present crisis and driven
tens of millions into poverty. He had said that democratic centralism
should be rejected and replaced by genuine democracy and had called
for a law on parties ending the Communist Party’s special status. Three
cheers, I thought. My briefing went on to say — with less than
complete perspicacity — that ‘some pundits even suggest that if [Mr
Yeltsin] is elected as President of the Russian Federation he may end
up with a more important job than Gorbachev’s presidency of a
crumbling Union. This is an exaggeration.’
I only spoke with Mr Yeltsin for three-quarters of an hour. At first I
was not quite sure what to make of him. He was far more my idea of
the typical Russian than was Mr Gorbachev — tall, burly, square
Slavic face and shock of white hair. He was self-confident without
being self-assertive, courteous, with a smile full of good humour and a
touch of self-mockery. But what impressed me most was that he had
obviously thought through some of the fundamental problems much
more clearly than had Mr Gorbachev. I began by saying that I
supported Mr Gorbachev and wanted that to be clear from the outset.
Mr Yeltsin replied that he knew I supported the Soviet leader and
perestroika and on some of these matters our opinions differed, but

basically he too supported Mr Gorbachev and the cause of reform. Mr
Gorbachev should, though, have paid more attention to some of the
things being said by the supporters of reform three or four years
earlier. Perestroika had originally been intended to make communism
more efficient. But that was impossible. The only serious option was
for far-reaching political and economic reform, including the
introduction of a market economy. But it was all getting very late.
I totally agreed with this. What struck me was that Mr Yeltsin,
unlike President Gorbachev, had escaped from the communist mindset
and language. He it was who also first alerted me to the relationship
between economic reform and the question of what powers should be
devolved to the individual republics. He explained just how little
autonomy the governments of the republics really had. They were
essentially agents — though frequently incompetent and corrupt
agents — of central decisions. He said that they must now be given
proper budgets and the power to decide how to spend them. Each
republic should have its own laws and constitution. He argued that it
was the failure to grapple with the issue of decentralization which had
led to the present troubles. With so vast a country it was simply not
possible to run everything from the centre. As a result of this
discussion I looked not just at Boris Yeltsin but at the fundamental
problems of the Soviet Union in a new light. When I reported later in
Bermuda to President Bush on my favourable impressions of Mr
Yeltsin he made it clear that the Americans did not share them. This
was a serious mistake.
VISIT TO THE SOVIET UNION, JUNE 1990
On my visit to the Soviet Union in June 1990 I was to encounter all
the different elements which constituted Soviet politics at this time —
not just President Gorbachev, but also more radical reformers,
nationalists and those who posed the greatest potential threat to
reform, that is the military. I flew into Moscow on the night of
Thursday 7 June to be met by Prime Minister Ryzhkov. The following
morning I met the reforming Mayor of Moscow, Mr Gavriil Popov. I
had never met a Russian like Mr Popov. He was the complete opposite
of the staid Soviet bureaucrat — informal, slightly scruffy and (as I
was subsequently told) probably wearing a tie for the very first time,
in honour of my visit.
I found him a devotee of Milton Friedman and the Chicago School of
Economics. He had grasped the crucial point that you could not create
a market economy in Moscow — or anywhere else for that matter —
without both private property and a clear framework of law. It was the
fact that the distribution of property was lagging far behind the other
reforms which he saw as at the root of the current political turmoil. So
he wanted people to be encouraged to own their own flats and shops
and he wanted the service industries to be transferred to private

ownership.
I went on to talks and a working lunch with President Gorbachev. I
found him rather less ebullient than usual but equable and goodhumoured. I took the opportunity to tell him that I continued to
believe passionately in what he was trying to achieve in the Soviet
Union. Many commentators and journalists had become blasé about
how much had already changed. I assured him that he would have my
full support both privately and publicly. As regards the changes which
were taking place in central and eastern Europe, I tried to convince
him that it was in the Soviet Union’s own interests that a unified
Germany should be part of NATO, because otherwise there would be
no justification for the presence of US forces in Europe. It was this
presence which was the crucial condition for European peace and
stability. I also described to him my ideas about the development of
the CSCE. Slightly to my surprise, I noted that at no stage did he say
that a united Germany in NATO was unacceptable; so I felt on this
matter at least I was making progress. The only significant differences
between us were over Lithuania — as I have mentioned earlier — and
my decision to raise with him the evidence which we had gleaned that
the Soviet Union was doing research into biological weapons —
something which he emphatically denied, but nonetheless promised to
investigate.
That afternoon I had an hour’s discussion with the Soviet military
leadership. I had decided that I wanted to see how they were thinking
and also let them know precisely what my own views were. Marshal
Yazov, the Soviet Defence minister, was very much in charge and the
others — including Marshal Moiseev, whose interventions and
demeanour marked him out as someone of unusual intelligence and
strength of character, only spoke when the Defence minister had
nothing to say. This was a pity because what Marshal Yazov did say
was conventional and predictable. I quickly turned the conversation to
the subject of East-West relations. I said that it was good that we were
entering a new period of better relations but that we should each of us
understand the need for strong defence. There was scope for reducing
conventional forces and nuclear weapons and for modifying our
strategy to new circumstances. But we would continue to need some
nuclear weapons which were the only effective deterrent. Marshal
Yazov took up the line that I had heard so many times from the
Soviets before about the need to do away with nuclear weapons
altogether. I said that I took leave to doubt whether the views of
Marshal Yazov and his colleagues on nuclear weapons were really very
different from mine. After all, they did have an awful lot of them and
presumably for some purpose. Unlike President Gorbachev, Marshal
Yazov stated that the Soviets would simply not accept a united
Germany in NATO. But whether this was because his views were
genuinely different from the Soviet leadership or because he expressed
them less subtly I could not fathom.

The following morning I flew to Kiev. My main purpose was to
attend the ‘British Days’ Exhibition which was the return leg of an
exchange which had opened with a ‘Soviet Month’ in Birmingham in
1988. When the idea of my going had first been mooted I had made
enquiries with the Foreign Office about how much was being spent on
the exhibition and — as usual — found that it had been subject to
some penny pinching. Partly as a result of my pressure, the Kiev
Exhibition turned out to be very good indeed. The intention was to
portray a typical street in a typical British northern town showing
shops and, in particular, the house of an ordinary working-class British
family. When the local people looked around at the hi-fi and other
domestic gadgets and luxuries and the car standing in the garage at
first they could not believe their eyes. As I went round, they asked me
whether this could really be true; did ordinary British people really
live like this? I said that indeed they did. Well, came the reply, all we
have been told was a lie and this proves it. In fact, everything in that
house was typical, even down to the teenager’s bedroom which — like
most teenagers’ bedrooms — had clothes and other possessions strewn
about it. My immediate reaction was that it should all have been
tidied up, but I was eventually persuaded that this was more
authentic.
But if the Ukrainians had not been prepared for what life was like in
Britain, I found that I had not been properly briefed on the situation in
Ukraine. Everywhere I went I found blue and yellow bunting and flags
(the colours of pre-Soviet Ukraine) and signs demanding Ukrainian
independence. This put me into something of a quandary. Much as I
admired General de Gaulle, I was not going to outrage my Soviet hosts
by proclaiming the Ukrainian equivalent of ‘Vive le Quebec Libre’. It
was not just that I was convinced that Mr Gorbachev was never going
to let Ukraine out of the Soviet Union without a struggle. That not just
the USSR but even Russia would be threatened by the emergence of a
separate Ukraine was a view that non-communist Russians as well as
communists held. (In fact, since the break-up of the USSR, the
emergence of an independent Ukraine has proved to be strategically
advantageous for Europe and the West and much still rides on its
economic and political stability and success.)
Any hope that I could avoid saying something which would be
misinterpreted by one side or the other quickly evaporated. The
recently appointed First Secretary of the Ukrainian Communist Party,
Mr Ivashko, said that it was a pity that I had made no time in my
schedule to meet members of the newly elected Ukrainian Supreme
Soviet. Would I be prepared to do so? I agreed. I imagined that this
would be a modest and informal reception. I entered the Parliament
building and then went through the door into the Chamber to find, to
my horror, that the whole hemi-cycle was full. I had no prepared
speech and it was clear that they were expecting one. I thought that at
least I would be able to think up something to say while I was being

introduced. But Mr Ivashko simply welcomed me and then asked me
to speak. I managed well enough, as I always do. But then came
questions. One of the questioners told me that there were ten deputies
present who used to be political prisoners. He said that he knew that it
was due to my efforts and the efforts of President Reagan that he was
there as a deputy able to see me today and not still a prisoner. But
what I could not do was to agree to set up an embassy in Kiev; nor
could I put Ukraine in the same category as the Baltic States. I felt that
I disappointed them. But I went away understanding just how
fundamental the whole problem of nationality was becoming and
doubtful about whether the Soviet Union could — or should —
ultimately be kept together.
The final leg of my visit to the USSR was Leninakan in Armenia,
where I was to open a school built with British aid after the
earthquake of 1988. It was another politically sensitive occasion for
there had been fierce fighting between Armenia and Azerbaijan over
the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh and the Soviets were very jittery
about security. The school itself was one of the few buildings which
had been reconstructed: the general Soviet performance of rebuilding
the area had been lamentable. I found myself engulfed in huge,
enthusiastic crowds — to such an extent, indeed, that I was turned
back by the security people from my original route. Though I had to
cut short my visit I came away with no more doubt than in the
Ukraine of the immense national fervour of the people around me.
VISIT TO CZECHOSLOVAKIA AND HUNGARY IN SEPTEMBER 1990
I shall always be glad that I was able to visit two former communist
countries while I was still Prime Minister. In Czechoslovakia and
Hungary in September 1990 I found myself speaking with people who
not long before had been totally excluded from power by the
communists and who were coming to grips with the communist legacy
of economic failure, pollution and despondency.
I had been greatly impressed by the inaugural speech of President
Havel of Czechoslovakia. He had spoken of ‘living in a decayed moral
environment … [in which] notions such as love, friendship,
compassion, humility and forgiveness have lost their depth and
dimension’. He had described the demoralization which communism
brought about, how ‘the previous regime, armed with its arrogant and
intolerant ideology, demeaned man into a production force and nature
into a production tool. In this way they attacked their very essence
and the mutual relationship between them.’
Czechoslovakia was lucky to have President Havel as an inspiration,
but no less lucky to have Václav Klaus as a dynamic, convinced free
enterprise economist for its Finance minister (now Czech Prime
Minister). Together they were rebuilding the social and economic
foundations of the country. Apart from the obvious problems which

confronted them, there was also the tension between the Czech and
Slovak elements of the Federal Republic. I spent most of my time in
Prague — a city which I did not know but where all my surroundings
reminded me that I was genuinely at the heart of Europe. But I also
visited Bratislava, whose economy and built environment bore many
more scars of communist vandalism. The Slovakian Prime Minister, Mr
Meciar, assured me that Czechoslovakia would remain a federal state
and this seemed to me sensible until more economic progress had been
made. But it was not to be.
Back in Prague I had discussions with President Havel. I had met
him before when he came to Britain and though his politics were to
the left of mine it was impossible to avoid liking and admiring him. He
for his part shared my views about the need to have the eastern
European countries in the Community as soon as that was practically
possible. He also liked my ideas about a European Magna Carta and
the development of the CSCE. I felt that he would be an ally in the
course on which I had embarked in Europe.
Then I went on to Hungary. Among the eastern European countries
Hungary had three important advantages. First, substantial economic
and a large amount of political reform had occurred under the
previous communist regime. So the transition was less difficult and
painful. Second, in Jozsef Antall, the Hungarian Prime Minister, the
country was in the safe hands of a genuine Conservative. I had met Mr
Antall on several previous occasions and he and I shared very much
the same political approach. Third, the Hungarians had held together
their governing coalition rather than splitting up in divisions on minor
points. Mr Antall had the skills and was quickly developing the
authority to give Hungary the leadership and continuity it needed.
Yet the task of economic reform was still daunting. The Hungarians
were tackling the key questions relating to property — both the
ownership of land, which exiles and their families wanted back, and
the privatization of industry. There was also a wider strategic issue.
Even more than Czechoslovakia and Poland, the Hungarians were keen
to break free once and for all from Soviet influence. Mr Antall had
announced that Hungary would leave the Warsaw Pact and wanted
closer relations with NATO or at least the Western European Union
(WEU). Poland and Czechoslovakia were toying with the same idea.
He assured me that the Warsaw Pact was indeed on its last legs. When
it finally expired I favoured a special associate membership of NATO
being offered to the eastern Europeans.
Another problem which the Hungarians, Czechs and Poles faced was
that their security services were deeply penetrated by the KGB and this
was a major obstacle to their taking a full role in intelligence cooperation with the West. In Czechoslovakia the Government had
expelled Communist Party members from the old Intelligence Service
altogether. My discussion with Mr Antall in his office in the Parliament
building — which I was delighted now to see used for its intended

purpose, unlike the time of my visit in 1984 — illustrated just how
careful they had to be. At one point he pointed across to a statue
presented to his liberal communist predecessor, Mr Nemeth, by the
Soviet Prime Minister, Mr Ryzhkov. Apparently, on close examination
it had turned out to be bugged. I said that I hoped it was still being
monitored. On further inspection it seemed so ugly that I suggested he
throw it away altogether. If only disposing of the rest of communism’s
legacy were so easy.
RESHAPING NATO
However fascinated I was by events in the Soviet Union and eastern
Europe, I could not forget that the strength and security of the West
ultimately depended upon the Anglo-American relationship. For
reasons I have explained — partly personal chemistry and partly
genuine differences of policy — that relationship had become
somewhat strained. I regarded it, therefore, as essential that the talks I
was due to have with President Bush in Bermuda in April 1990 should
be a success. This would be as much a matter of tone as substance.
Generally speaking, I now waited for the President to set out his views
before explaining mine. In Bermuda we deliberately sought to create
the kind of relaxed atmosphere which I now knew he preferred. It was
almost a ‘family’ affair and concluded with the President and Denis
playing eighteen holes of golf in the pouring rain — a very British
occasion.
It was the future of NATO and decisions about the defence of Europe
which were in the forefront of my and the President’s minds. I sought
to leave him in no doubt about my strong commitment to NATO which
my earlier telephone conversation about the CSCE and the reasons for
retaining the Warsaw Pact had apparently somewhat scrambled. The
President was keen to have an early NATO summit. So, it seemed, was
the NATO Secretary-General, Dr Woerner. I would have preferred one
in the autumn in order to allow for more preparation. But it was clear
that the President wanted a June summit and would like Britain to
host it. (In fact it took place in early July.) He had also concluded that
Congress was going to withhold funds for the development of a
Follow-On to LANCE. He therefore wanted to announce its
cancellation. I accepted that there was very little which could be done
about this, but I thought it crucial to secure firm assurances about the
future stationing of nuclear weapons in Germany, in particular TASM.
The real question was how we were most likely to achieve this. In fact,
this approach turned out to be a key to the Americans’ thinking in the
run-up to the NATO summit. Their aim was to make it a public
relations success, so that we could win German support for SNF and
Soviet acceptance that Germany should remain in NATO. When I got
back to London I set in hand the arrangements for us to host a NATO
summit. There was only one complication, which was that a meeting

of the North Atlantic Council — that is NATO Foreign ministers — was
scheduled for June at Turnberry, a few miles south of Ayr on the west
coast of Scotland. I wanted this to go ahead because it was where the
more significant decisions were likely to be made about how NATO’s
forces might be reshaped.
Not for the first time, I found myself at odds with the Americans and
indeed with the NATO Secretary-General about how we should
approach the NATO summit. The Americans were keen to announce a
range of initiatives, proposing deep cuts in conventional forces and
still deeper cuts in the nuclear stockpile. Messages flew back and forth
between me and President Bush and some of the more eye-catching
and less considered proposals were dropped. Not that I disagreed with
everything the Americans wanted from the summit. In particular, I
was strongly in favour of Jim Baker’s ideas about strengthening
political consultation, as opposed to just military planning, as one of
the functions of NATO. I believed — as did the Americans — that the
importance of NATO as a means of avoiding friction between America
and Europe was greater than ever.
What I was unhappy about was the American proposal formally to
change in the communiqué the traditional NATO strategy of flexible
response. They were insistent on the insertion of the phrase that
nuclear weapons were ‘weapons of last resort’. This, I felt, would
undermine the credibility of NATO’s SNF. We should continue to resist
any qualification of the role of nuclear weapons in NATO, just as we
had always done. We were slipping towards — though we had not
reached — that fatal position of undertaking that there would be ‘no
first use of nuclear weapons’, on which Soviet propaganda had always
insisted. Such an undertaking would leave our conventional forces
vulnerable to attack by their superior numbers. In the end the first
phrase did appear hedged around in the following form:
Finally, with the total withdrawal of Soviet-stationed forces and the
implementation of a CFE Agreement, the allies concerned can reduce their
reliance on nuclear weapons. These will continue to fulfil an essential role in
the overall strategy of the alliance to prevent war by ensuring that there are
no circumstances in which nuclear retaliation in response to military action
might be discounted. However, in the transformed Europe, they will be able
to adopt a new NATO strategy making nuclear forces truly weapons of last resort,
[my italics]

I cannot say that I was satisfied with this unwieldly compromise.
But in the end military strategy is not dependent upon pieces of paper
but on the commitment of resources to practical military objectives.
The review which was begun at Turnberry and which in Britain’s case
would be put into effect through the ‘Options for Change’ exercise that
Tom King conducted as Defence Secretary had to concentrate on
where the priorities for inevitably decreased expenditure would now
be.

A month before the NATO summit I set out in my speech to the
North Atlantic Council my own views on the matter. The stress I
placed on preservation of the United States’ military presence in
Europe and the continuing role of updated nuclear weapons would not
have surprised my audience. But I also emphasized that NATO must
consider an ‘out of area’ role. I asked the question:
Ought NATO to give more thought to possible threats to our security from
other directions? There is no guarantee that threats to our security will stop
at some imaginary line across the mid-Atlantic. It is not long since some of
us had to go to the Arabian Gulf to keep oil supplies flowing. We shall
become very heavily dependent on Middle Eastern oil once again in the next
century. With the spread of sophisticated weapons and military technology
to areas like the Middle East, potential threats to NATO territory may
originate more from outside Europe. Against that background, it would be
only prudent for NATO countries to retain a capacity to carry out multiple
roles, with more flexible and versatile forces.

This passage reflected my thinking over a number of years. I had
seen for myself how important a western presence could be in securing
western interests in far-flung areas of the world, not least the Middle
East. I did not believe that even if the military threat from the Soviets
had diminished, that from other dictators would not arise. But of
course I could not know that within two months we would be
confronted by an explosive crisis in the Gulf.
REFLECTIONS
As I look back on the international developments of the late 1980s,
they seem to be overwhelmingly positive. Communism was defeated,
freedom restored to the former satellites, the cruel division of Europe
ended, the Soviet Union launched onto the path of reform, democracy
and national rights and the West, in particular the United States, left
in possession of the field as its political values and economic system
were embraced both by its former adversaries and, increasingly, by the
countries of the Third World.
The credit for these historic achievements must go principally to the
United States and in particular to President Reagan, whose policies of
military and economic competition with the Soviet Union forced the
Soviet leaders, in particular Mr Gorbachev, to abandon their ambitions
of hegemony and to embark on the process of reform which in the end
brought the entire communist system crashing down. But this would
never have been accomplished without the long and courageous
resistance of the peoples of the Soviet Union and central and eastern
Europe. We will never know the names of all who suffered and
perished in that struggle but we can celebrate their leaders from
Vladimir Bukovsky to Václav Havel, from Alexander Solzhenitsyn to
Cardinal Mindszenty, and the four young heroes who gave their lives
defending the Russian White House in the last dying days of the old

regime.
As that old order crumbled and its people emerged blinking into the
light, President Bush managed the dangerous and volatile
transformation with great diplomatic skill. Nor should credit be
withheld from the steadfast European allies of America who resisted
both Soviet pressure and Soviet blandishments to maintain a strong
western defence: in particular, Helmut Schmidt, Helmut Kohl, François
Mitterrand and … but modesty forbids.
The world is a better place. But in some ways it is an old-fashioned
place. The Europe that has emerged from behind the Iron Curtain has
many of the features of the Europes of 1914 and 1939: ethnic strife,
contested borders, political extremism, nationalist passions and
economic backwardness. And there is another familiar bogey from the
past — the German Question.
If there is one instance in which a foreign policy I pursued met with
unambiguous failure, it was my policy on German reunification. This
policy was to encourage democracy in East Germany while slowing
down the country’s reunification with West Germany. With the first
half of that policy no one disagrees. Nor at the time did everyone
disagree with the second, to which indeed frequent lip service was
paid. Most observers were unaware of the nationalist passion for
German unity that burned in the East. Indeed, even the dissident
leaders of the East German demonstrations that led to freedom were
themselves unaware of it, being in favour of a free, reformed,
independent East Germany, rather than a larger Federal Republic. And
Germany’s neighbours all hoped to avoid this latter outcome because
they saw it as destabilizing an already unsettled continent.
In the event, the desire for unity among Germans on both sides of
the Elbe proved irresistible. So the policy failed.
But was the policy wrong? That is a more complex question
requiring a more nuanced reply. Look first at the consequences of the
rapid reunification as they worked themselves out. West Germany’s
absorption of its next-door relation has been economically disastrous,
and that disaster has spread to the rest of the European Community
via the Bundesbank’s high interest rates and the ERM. We have all
paid the price in unemployment and recession. East German political
immaturity has affected the whole country in the form of a revived
(though containable) neo-Nazi and xenophobic extremism.
Internationally, it has created a German state so large and dominant
that it cannot be easily fitted into the new architecture of Europe.
Look also at the incidental benefits that the policy brought about. It
forced the German Government to clarify the border question with its
eastern neighbours. More generally, it provided the occasion whereby
the CSCE framework was established to ensure that existing borders
would not be changed by unilateral action or without general
agreement. It strengthened the relationship between Britain and the

other countries of central and eastern Europe who now, to some
extent, see us as attentive guardians of their interests. But the
fundamental argument for slowing German reunification was to create
a breathing space in which a new architecture of Europe could be
devised where a united Germany would not be a destabilizing
influence/over-mighty subject/bull in a china shop. Arriving
prematurely as it did, a united Germany has tended to encourage three
unwelcome developments: the rush to European federalism as a way of
tying down Gulliver; the maintenance of a Franco-German bloc for the
same purpose; and the gradual withdrawal of the US from Europe on
the assumption that a German-led federal Europe will be both stable
and capable of looking after its own defence.
I will not reiterate here all the reasons I have given earlier for
believing these developments to be damaging. But I will hazard the
forecast that a federal Europe would be both unstable internally and
an obstacle to harmonious arrangements — in trade, politics and
defence — with America externally; that the Franco-German bloc
would increasingly mean a German bloc (in economics, a deutschmark
bloc) with France as very much a junior partner; and that as a result
America would, first bring its legions home, and subsequently find
itself at odds with the new European player in world politics.
These developments are not inevitable. One revelation that emerged
from the failure of Britain’s German policy was the evident anxiety of
France in relation to German power and ambition. It should not be
beyond the capacity of a future British prime minister to rebuild an
Anglo-French entente as a counter-balance to German influence. Nor,
as part of this policy, to shift the emphasis in Europe back towards the
original Gaullist idea of a Europe des Patries. What these new
approaches will require, however, is a recognition from the French
political élite that any stable European balance of power will require
the more or less permanent presence of the United States in Europe.
And that is a recognition that so far French presidents have been
prepared to grant only in private.
The US-Soviet Strategic Arms Reduction Talks, which had begun in the first year of
the Reagan Administration.
*
*
*
*

See p. 258.

For this meeting see pp. 746–8.

For other discussions at this meeting see p. 759.

The Helsinki Final Act of 1975 contained the following commitment: ‘The
participating States regard as inviolable all one another’s frontiers as well as the
frontiers of all States in Europe and therefore they will refrain now and in the future
from assaulting these frontiers. Accordingly, they will also refrain from any demand
for, or act of, seizure and usurpation of part or all of the territory of any participating
State.’ However, the Final Act also provided that ‘frontiers can be changed, in
accordance with international law, by peaceful means and by agreement’.
*

*

See p. 767.

CHAPTER XXVII

No Time to Go Wobbly
The response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990

EVENTS AT ASPEN
On the morning of Wednesday 1 August 1990 the VC10 left Heathrow
with me and my party aboard bound for Aspen, Colorado. The
President was due to open the Aspen Institute Conference on the
Thursday and I was to close it on the Sunday. I had gone out early in
order to be present for his speech. At the time I left I already knew
that the Iraqis were sending troops down to the border with Kuwait.
The negotiations between Iraq and Kuwait which had been taking
place in Jeddah had broken for the day but we understood that they
were to be resumed. It therefore seemed that the Iraqi military action
was a case of sabre rattling. We soon learnt that it was not. At 2 a.m.
Kuwaiti time on Thursday 2 August Iraq carried out a full-scale
military invasion — though claiming that it was an internal coup —
and assumed total control.
An hour later — early evening on Wednesday, Colorado time —
Charles Powell telephoned me from his hotel to tell me the news and I
decided at once to instruct two ships in Penang and Mombasa, both
about a week’s sailing time away, to make for the Gulf while the
situation developed. We already had one ship of the Armilla patrol in
the Gulf — HMS York, at Dubai. First thing the following morning I
learnt in a note from Charles about the latest situation. Other Arab
governments had evidently been caught off balance. The Arab League
of Foreign Ministers meeting in Cairo had failed to agree a statement.
King Hussein was trying to excuse the Iraqi action on the grounds that
the Kuwaitis had been unnecessarily difficult. The ruling families in
the Gulf were alarmed. With strong British support the UN Security
Council had passed a resolution condemning Iraq for its action and
calling for total withdrawal and immediate negotiations. Back in
London, Douglas Hurd — competent professional that he was — had
ordered the freezing of Kuwaiti assets in Britain, the Iraqis
unfortunately having only debts. An immediate question now was
whether Saddam Hussein would go over the border and seize Saudi
Arabia’s oil fields. (This was indeed important: but I was convinced
from the start that it must not divert us from the need to get Saddam
Hussein out of the territory he had already seized by an act of illegal
aggression.)
I was staying at the guesthouse to Ambassador Henry Catto’s ranch
while all this was going on. I read Charles’s note, listened to the news

and then went for a walk to sort things out in my own mind. By the
time I got back Charles and Sir Antony Acland, our ambassador, were
waiting for me. We established from the White House that President
Bush was still coming to Aspen and would arrive later that morning.
As is my wont, I set about arguing through the whole problem with
them and by the end had defined the two main points. By the time I
was due to meet him at the main ranch I was quite clear what we must
do.
Fortunately, the President began by asking me what I thought. I told
him my conclusions in the clearest and most straightforward terms.
First, aggressors must never be appeased. We learned that to our cost
in the 1930s. Second, if Saddam Hussein were to cross the border into
Saudi Arabia he could go right down the Gulf in a matter of days. He
would then control 65 per cent of the world’s oil reserves and could
blackmail us all. Not only did we have to move to stop the aggression,
therefore, we had to stop it quickly.
In making these two points I felt that experience as well as instinct
enabled me to trust my judgement. There was, of course, the
enormously valuable experience of having been Prime Minister
through the Falklands War. My visits to the Gulf had also allowed me
to establish bonds of trust with the rulers of many of these states, who
often had closer links with Britain than with America. I understood
their problems and could gauge their reactions.
President Bush listened to what I had to say. He then told me that
he had been speaking to President Mubarak and King Hussein. The
message he had received was that the United States should stay calm
and give an Arab solution a chance. He had said that that was fine but
that it must involve Iraqi withdrawal and the restoration of the lawful
Government of Kuwait. He had meanwhile authorized a boycott of
Iraqi goods, termination of credits and the freezing of Iraqi and
Kuwaiti assets. He had also instructed ships of the American fleet to
move north from the Indian Ocean into the Gulf, although they were
currently being hampered by heavy seas.
We then got down to discussing what must be done next. I said that
if Saddam Hussein did not withdraw, the Security Council would need
to impose a full trade embargo. That, however, would only be effective
if everybody implemented it. It would be necessary to close down the
pipelines across both Turkey and Saudi Arabia through which Iraq
exported the greater part of its oil. Those would not be easy decisions.
Saudi Arabia, especially, might fear that Iraq would use such action as
an excuse to attack her. We could send troops to protect Saudi Arabia;
but only at the specific request of the king. (In fact, a few days later
the US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, flew to Saudi Arabia to talk to
the king about precisely this.)
At this point President Bush was told that the President of Yemen
wanted to speak to him on the telephone. Before the President left to
take the call, I reminded him that Yemen, a temporary member of the

Security Council, had not voted on the resolution demanding the
withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. It turned out that the
President of Yemen too wanted time to come up with an Arab
solution. President Bush told him that such a ‘solution’ must involve
the withdrawal of Iraqi forces and return of the proper Government of
Kuwait if it was to be accepted. The President of Yemen then
apparently compared what had happened in Kuwait to US intervention
in Grenada at which George Bush rightly bridled. When he returned
President Bush and I agreed that all this did not seem very
encouraging. We then went out to give a press conference. The
President was asked if he ruled out the use of force. He replied that he
did not — a statement the press took to be a strengthening of his
position against Saddam Hussein. But I had never found any weakness
in it from the first.
By now I was receiving a flood of telegrams reporting on reactions
to the invasion. The Cabinet Office assessment of Iraq’s plans noted
that an attack against Saudi Arabia did not seem imminent, because it
would probably take a week to assemble the required forces. To my
mind this reinforced rather than diminished the need for immediate
tough action.
Understandably, I now had only half my mind on the programme of
events which had been arranged for me. That said, I was fascinated by
what I saw. Friday was a day of presentations and discussions about
science, environment and defence — punctuated by news about what
was happening in the crisis which now gripped the international
community. I was talking to the young scientists working at the SDI
National Test Facility at Falcon when I was called away to speak to
President Bush on the telephone. He gave me the good news that
President Ozal of Turkey had said he would take action to cut off the
Iraqi oil which was going through the Turkish pipeline. I was not
surprised. In my two visits to Turkey I had been very impressed with
the President’s toughness. I had also been struck by the country’s
strategic significance. As a secular but predominantly Muslim state
with a large army, looking westwards to Europe but also on the fringe
of the Middle East, Turkey would be a vital bulwark against aggressive
Islamic fundamentalism or other brands of revolutionary Arab
nationalism like that of Saddam Hussein.
After lunch I went by helicopter to the Strategic Air Defence
Monitoring Centre at Cheyenne Mountain which keeps a watch on
every satellite launched. Again I felt awed by the sophistication of
America’s scientific and technological achievement. From within this
hollowed-out mountain the United States could observe deep into
space for military and scientific purposes. Two days later I was told by
the general in charge of the operation that they had observed that the
Soviets had now put up two satellites over the northern end of the
Gulf. It was a useful indication of their concern.

On Saturday morning I spoke with President Mitterrand on the
telephone. As over the Falklands, he was taking a robust position: in
spite of a misconceived speech at the United Nations which tried to
link a solution of the Gulf crisis with other Middle Eastern issues,
President Mitterrand and France showed throughout the crisis that the
French were the only European country, apart from ourselves, with the
stomach for a fight.
I have already described the speech I gave on Sunday morning to
the Aspen Institute.* Though it addressed broader international issues,
I inserted a section on the Gulf. It read:
Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait defies every principle for which the United Nations
stands. If we let it succeed, no small country can ever feel safe again. The
law of the jungle would take over from the rule of law.
The United Nations must assert its authority and apply a total economic
embargo unless Iraq withdraws without delay. The United States and Europe
both support this. But to be fully effective it will need the collective support
of all the United Nations’ members. They must stand up and be counted
because a vital principle is at stake: an aggressor must never be allowed to
get his way.

My mind was now turning to the next practical steps we could take
to exert pressure on Iraq. The European Community countries had
agreed to support a complete economic and trade embargo of Iraq. But
it was the Iraqi oil exports and the willingness of Turkey and Saudi
Arabia to block them which would be crucial. The Americans had
some lingering doubts about whether Turkey and Saudi Arabia would
act. I was more confident. But these doubts increased the importance
of enforcing all other measures still more effectively. I instructed the
Foreign Office to prepare plans to implement a naval blockade in the
north-east Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the north of the Gulf to
intercept shipments of Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil. I also asked that more
thought be given to precise military guarantees for Saudi Arabia and
for details of what aircraft we could send to the Gulf area
immediately.
I had planned to take a few days’ holiday with my family after the
Aspen speech, but after an invitation from the White House decided
instead to fly to Washington and resume my talks with the President.
For all the friendship and co-operation I had had from President
Reagan, I was never taken into the Americans’ confidence more than I
was during the two hours or so I spent that afternoon at the White
House. The meeting began in a very restricted session with just the
President, Brent Scowcroft, myself and Charles Powell. Half an hour
later we were joined by Dan Quayle, Jim Baker and John Sununu. The
last twenty minutes of discussion was attended by the SecretaryGeneral of NATO.
The President that day was an altogether more confident George
Bush than the man with whom I had had earlier dealings. He was firm,
cool, showing the decisive qualities which the Commander-in-Chief of

the greatest world power must possess. Any hesitation fell away. I had
always liked George Bush. Now my respect for him soared.
The President began by reporting what was known about the
situation and US plans to deal with it. Saddam Hussein had sworn that
if American forces moved into Saudi Arabia he would liberate the
kingdom from the Saudi royal family. There were now clear
photographs — which the President passed around to us — showing
that Iraqi tanks had moved right up to the border with Saudi Arabia. I
said that it was vital to bolster the Saudis. The main danger was that
Iraq would attack Saudi Arabia before the king formally asked the
United States for help.
In fact, part of the way through our discussions, Dick Cheney
telephoned the President from Saudi Arabia. He reported that King
Fahd was fully behind the United States plan to move the 82nd
Airborne Division together with forty-eight F-15 fighters to Saudi
Arabia. The king’s only condition was that there should be no
announcement until the forces were actually in place. This was
excellent news. But how would we be able to conceal all this from the
world media and the Iraqis who, if they knew about it, might well
decide to go into Saudi Arabia at once? In fact, we were helped by the
fact that all eyes were on the United Nations which was discussing
Security Council Resolution 661, that imposed a ban on trade with
Iraq and Kuwait, though making no explicit provision for its
enforcement. American aircraft were eight hours into flight by the
time the press discovered they had left.
This meeting also saw the beginning of an almost interminable
argument between the Americans — particularly Jim Baker — and me
about whether and in what form United Nations authority was needed
for measures against Saddam Hussein. I felt that the Security Council
Resolution which had already been passed, combined with our ability
to invoke Article 51 of the UN Charter on self-defence, was sufficient.
Although I did not spell this out on the present occasion — there were
too many other pressing matters to decide — my attitude, which had
been reinforced as a result of our difficulties with the UN over the
Falklands, was based on two considerations. First, there was no
certainty that the wording of a resolution, which was always open to
amendment, would finish up by being satisfactory. If not, it might tie
our hands unacceptably. Of course, with the end of the Cold War the
Soviet Union was likely to be more co-operative. Communist China,
fearful of isolation, was also disinclined to create too many problems.
But the fact remained that if one could achieve an objective without
UN authority there was no point in running the risks attached to
seeking it.
Second, although I am a strong believer in international law, I did
not like unnecessary resort to the UN, because it suggested that
sovereign states lacked the moral authority to act on their own behalf.
If it became accepted that force could only be used — even in self-

defence — when the United Nations approved, neither Britain’s
interests nor those of international justice and order would be served.
The UN was a useful — for some matters vital — forum. But it was
hardly the nucleus of a new world order. And there was still no
substitute for the leadership of the United States.
The discussion between President Bush and myself in Washington
continued. I emphasized the importance of preparing to respond to
any Iraqi use of chemical weapons. I also stressed that we should fight
the propaganda war with vigour. This was a defensive action by the
West to preserve Saudi Arabia’s integrity and anything which
complicated or obscured that must be avoided. So, for example, we
had to do everything to keep the Israelis out of the conflict. I also
promised to use my contacts with Middle Eastern rulers to try to
increase support for American action in defence of Saudi Arabia and to
heighten the pressure on Iraq.
I returned to London on the Tuesday. The following day I had an
hour’s telephone conversation with King Fahd to receive his formal
request for our own ‘planes and (if necessary) armed forces to be
stationed in Saudi Arabia. He expressed incredulity that King Hussein
should have sided with Saddam Hussein, whose party had murdered
King Hussein’s relatives. But King Fahd was as strong as ever in his
determination to stand up against aggression.
Later that day I also had the sad duty of attending Ian Gow’s
funeral. One of my most loyal and candid advisers, there were to be
many times when I missed his shrewd counsel and his deadpan wit.
THE BUILD-UP TO WAR
I was not allowed by the Conservative Party to see through the
campaign to throw Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. But in the months
which now followed — and in spite of the other difficulties I faced —
my attention was rarely away from the Gulf for long. I set up a small
Cabinet sub-committee — Douglas Hurd (Foreign Secretary), Tom
King (Defence Secretary), John Wakeham (Energy Secretary), Patrick
Mayhew (Attorney-General), William Waldegrave (Minister of State at
the Foreign Office), Archie Hamilton (Minister of State for the Armed
Forces) and the Chief of the Defence Staff. It was this group, which
met regularly, rather than the wider Cabinet Committee OD, which
took the main decisions.
One of our first tasks was to provide the promised support for Saudi
Arabia. On Thursday 9 August Tom King announced the despatch of
two squadrons of aircraft — one made up of Tornado F3 air defence
fighters and the other of Jaguar ground attack ‘planes, 24 aircraft in
all. They were in place and operational two days later. Nimrod
maritime reconnaisance and VC10 tanker aircraft were also sent. We
reinforced them at the end of August with a further squadron of

Tornados — but this time the GR1 ground-attack version — which
were sent to Bahrain to provide a day-and-night anti-armour
capability. Rapier air defence detachments were deployed in support.
Of course, I kept in frequent touch with President Bush over the
telephone. I ensured that he was abreast of the military dispositions
we were making and that we responded to American requests. We also
regularly discussed the latest information about Saddam Hussein’s
intentions. The general view seemed to be that whatever he had
originally planned, he would not attack Saudi Arabia, once American
forces were there. But it seemed to me that the important lesson for us
was that Saddam Hussein was simply not predictable. As I put it in a
minute to the Ministry of Defence on Sunday 12 August:
We thought that Iraq would not move into Kuwait, although their forces
were massing on the border. Let us not make the same mistake again. They
may move into Saudi Arabia. We must be ready.

These were weeks of vigorous telephone diplomacy. I encouraged
Turkey in its steadfast opposition to Iraq. The Turkish economy was
badly hit because — unlike Jordan — Turkey was applying UN
sanctions effectively. I spoke to President Ozal about this over the
telephone on Friday 24 August. He commiserated with me about what
he described as Saddam Hussein’s disgraceful exploitation of British
hostages on television. He thought that this exhibition had in fact
worked against him and shown what sort of person he really was. I
never failed to remind the Saudis and the governments of the Gulf
States how much they owed to Turkey and urged them to offer
generous financial compensation.
A less savoury ally against Saddam Hussein was Syria, with which
we still had no formal diplomatic relations. I disliked the regime and
had no illusion about its continued willingness to employ terrorism
and violence if they suited its purposes. But the fact remained that the
rivalry between Syria and Iraq gave us an opportunity which must not
be missed. Moreover, it made no sense to have our forces fighting
alongside the Syrians if we still had no diplomatic channels for
discussion. Reluctantly, therefore, I agreed to the reopening of
diplomatic relations, though the formal announcement came a few
days after I left office in November.
In the evening of 26 August President Bush telephoned me from
Kennebunkport. I told him how pleased I was with Security Council
Resolution 665 which had been passed the day before, enabling us to
enforce the embargo. We must use our powers to stop Iraqi shipping.
This was no time to go wobbly. Information we had gleaned from
secret sources must be published to show up sanctions busting. The
President agreed. I told him that the only area in which I thought we
were not doing well was in the propaganda battle. We were now
probably going into a longish period to see whether sanctions would
work and we must not let the faint hearts grow in strength. The

President was worried also about the use of the port of Aqaba in
Jordan to evade sanctions and I told him that I would raise the
question when I saw King Hussein in a few days’ time.
In the case of Syria, my enemy’s enemy had to become my friend.
But I was saddened that one of Britain’s most long-standing friends
appeared to be siding with the enemy. I had been on the friendliest of
terms with King Hussein of Jordan but there could be no question of
just allowing him to continue to flout sanctions and justify the Iraqi
invasion. So when he came to see me for lunch on Friday 31 August I
could not conceal my feelings.
He was clearly very uneasy about the line he was taking. He began
by making a forty-minute statement which yet again justified what the
Iraqis had done. I said that I was amazed at his account of what was in
fact a blatant act of aggression. Iraq was a country which had used
chemical weapons — not just in war but against its own people.
Saddam Hussein was not only an international brigand, he was also a
loser who had done immense damage both to the Palestinian cause
and to the Arabs and who over eight years had vainly thrown wave
after wave of young Iraqis into the war against Iran. I said that the
king should not be attempting to negotiate on Iraq’s behalf but rather
to implement sanctions against it. I could not have been more direct.
But no amount of pressure was likely to alter the calculation which the
king had made: that he could not come out openly against Saddam
Hussein and survive.
On Thursday 6 September the House of Commons was recalled to
debate the position in the Gulf. Unlike the US Congress, Parliament
firmly supported the stance taken by the Government: the voting when
the debate ended the following day was 437:35. I was also turning my
mind to the military campaign which I believed would have to be
fought. Later that same afternoon I discussed the situation with
Douglas Hurd. I said that I was ever more certain that Saddam Hussein
would not leave Kuwait unless he was thrown out. Douglas was more
inclined to be optimistic, believing that sanctions might succeed if we
could convince Saddam Hussein that he would be militarily beaten if
he stayed. I agreed that sanctions must be given some more time to
work. But we must not lose sight of the danger of leaving our forces
too long in the desert and of the Arab and wider international front
against Saddam Hussein crumbling. I did not want to see a firm
deadline but we must start to look at the dates which would narrow
the options for military action. I also said that we must not be under
any illusion: if the sanctions against Iraq did not work, and the
Americans and the Multi-National Force failed to take action, Israel
would strike.
It was very difficult to know how effective the Iraqi army would be.
I had some doubts about their soldiers’ spirit, based on the assessment
of their preference for high-level bombing and chemical weapons over
infantry fighting in the war against Iran. But the Republican Guard

was thought to be more formidable. The Americans were extremely
cautious, wanting very large amounts of armour in the Gulf before
they would be prepared to move. By contrast, some of Iraq’s
neighbours thought that the Iraqis would crumble quickly; and as it
turned out they were proved right.
In any case, as with the Falklands, I was determined to ensure that
our forces had the best possible equipment and plenty of it. The
Americans wanted us to reinforce our troops in the Gulf and had
suggested that we should send an armoured brigade equipped with
Challenger I tanks to join the Allied Forces there. I knew that the
Challenger had a good reputation for manoeuvrability, but a bad one
for reliability. So on Thursday 13 September I called a meeting with
Tom King, the Chief of the Defence Staff, the Chief of the General Staff
and representatives of Vickers. I cross-questioned them about all the
possible weaknesses. I could not forget the way in which the earlier
American attempt under President Jimmy Carter to rescue the Iranian
hostages had failed because the helicopters used had been unable to
cope with the desert conditions. After much discussion they convinced
me. But I said that they must take all the spare parts they could
possibly need with them, not wait for more to be sent out, and I also
insisted upon receiving a written guarantee of 80 per cent availability
— several times better than Challenger had achieved in Germany.
I also wanted the commander of our forces to be someone in whom I
— and they — would have complete confidence. The MoD came up
with several names but only one man seemed to be right for the job —
Sir Peter de la Billière. Tom King was reluctant to see him appointed:
Peter de la Billière was within a week of retiring and the other
candidates clearly had much to be said for them. But I wanted a
fighting general. I knew the qualities of Sir Peter from his command of
the SAS operation at the time of the 1980 Iranian Embassy siege* and
from the Falklands. I also knew that he spoke Arabic — of some
importance when part of a large multi-national force with a crucial
Arab element. So I told Tom King that Sir Peter was not retiring now if
I had anything to do with it: and if he did not go to command our
forces in the Gulf, he would be coming as personal adviser on the
conduct of the war to Downing Street. He went to the Gulf.
I telephoned George Bush the next morning to tell him that I was
about to announce the decision to send the 7th Armoured Brigade to
the Gulf, comprising two armoured regiments with 120 tanks, a
regiment of Field Artillery, a battalion of armoured infantry, anti-tank
helicopters and all the necessary support. It would be a completely
self-supporting force, numbering up to 7,500. They were the
successors to the ‘Desert Rats’ of Alamein. The President was pleased.
‘My heavens, a marvellous commitment; this is really something,’ he
said.
I met the President again in New York on the evening of Sunday 30
September. We were officially there to attend the ‘UN Children’s

Summit’, an occasion at which the only high point was an inspiring
speech from President Havel of Czechoslovakia. President Bush was
very tired, having flown back to Washington from New York to
complete negotiations with Congress on the fateful 1990 budget
compromise, which was to undermine him politically, before returning
for this meeting. But he was in good spirits. We discussed Jim Baker’s
wish for another UN Security Council Resolution specifically to
endorse the use of force to bring about Iraq’s withdrawal from Kuwait.
As always, I was dubious, preferring to rely on Article 51. But what
was clear to all of us was that the time for using force was now rapidly
approaching. There was no evidence that sanctions were having any
real effect on Iraq’s decisions — and that was what counted. I was
clearer than ever in my mind that there could be no weakening in our
resolve to defeat — and be seen to defeat — Saddam Hussein’s
aggression.
As so often over these months I found myself reliving in an only
slightly different form my experiences of the build-up to the battle for
the Falklands. There is never any lack of people anxious to avoid the
use of force. No matter how little chance there is of negotiation
succeeding — and no matter how many difficulties are created for the
troops who are trying to prepare themselves for war — the case is
always made for yet another piece of last-ditch diplomacy.
On this occasion it fell to Mr Yevgeny Primakov, Mr Gorbachev’s
special emissary on the Gulf, to make all the standard arguments. He
came to see me at Chequers on the afternoon of Saturday 20 October,
having just returned from Baghdad. He argued for some ‘flexible
linkage’ between the crisis in the Gulf and the Arab-Israeli problem to
save Saddam Hussein’s face and to give ‘some room for manoeuvre’. I
said that Saddam Hussein was a dictator, that we should look at his
actions rather than listen to his words, and that there could be no
deals with such a man. Of course, we all had a duty to return with
greater determination to resolve the Arab-Israeli problem; but that
duty obtained quite independent of Saddam Hussein’s invasion of
Kuwait. He must not be appeased. We learned later that Mr Primakov
had reported back to Moscow that Mrs Thatcher was quite the most
difficult and determined of them all.
On the evening of Tuesday 23 October I had a meeting with Tom
King and Douglas Hurd. The main purpose was to give guidance to the
Chief of the Defence Staff at his meetings with General Colin Powell,
chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, in the United States over the
next two days. I began by listing our strategic objectives. These were
to provide the guidelines according to which British policy in the
forthcoming war should be determined. Saddam Hussein must leave
Kuwait and the latter’s legitimate Government must be restored. All
hostages must be released. Iraq must pay compensation. Those
responsible for atrocities must be brought to account before an
international court. Iraq’s nuclear, biological and chemical capability

must be eliminated in the event of hostilities and dismantled in the
event of a peaceful withdrawal of Iraqi troops. To do this the widest
possible alliance of Arab governments against Iraq must be maintained
and Israeli involvement must be avoided. A regional security system
must be established to constrain Iraq in the future.
As for Saddam Hussein himself, it would not be a specific objective
to bring about his downfall, though that might be a desirable sideeffect of our actions. We must aim for a situation in which Saddam
Hussein had to face his own people as a beaten leader of a beaten
army. I said that further work on targets in Iraq was needed. Purely
civilian targets must be avoided. But it was for consideration whether
power stations and dams should be regarded as legitimate targets.
There was no intention that our forces should occupy any part of Iraqi
territory, but they might need to enter Iraq in hot pursuit of Iraqi
forces. I said that it was necessary to get the Americans to accept that
military action would in all likelihood have to be initiated before the
end of the year. I also said that we must try to continue to wean them
away from seeking prior authorization for the use of force from the UN
and to rely instead on Article 51.
I argued this last point through with Jim Baker when he came to see
me on the evening of Friday 9 November. But I was not able to sway
him. He said that UN authority was crucial to sustain the support of
American public opinion for military action. I also raised my worries
about delaying the military option until the extra American forces now
being sent had arrived in the Gulf. I said that it was vital not to miss
the window of opportunity which would close in early March. He was
able to reassure me on this point. But by now time was running out for
me as well as for Saddam Hussein.
In response to Jim Baker’s request and at my last Cabinet on
Thursday 22 November — to which I announced my resignation as
Prime Minister — the decision was made to double Britain’s military
commitment and to deploy an extra brigade to the Gulf. We would
send the 4th Brigade from Germany, comprising a regiment of
Challenger tanks, two armoured infantry battalions and a regiment of
Royal Artillery, with reconnaissance and supporting services. Together
the two brigades would form the 1st Armoured Division. The total
number of UK forces committed would amount to more than 30,000.
Since the morning of Thursday 2 August hardly a day had passed
without my involvement in diplomatic and military moves to isolate
and defeat Iraq. One of my very few abiding regrets is that I was not
there to see the issue through. The failure to disarm Saddam Hussein
and to follow through the victory so that he was publicly humiliated in
the eyes of his subjects and Islamic neighbours was a mistake which
stemmed from the excessive emphasis placed right from the start on
international consensus. The opinion of the UN counted for too much
and the military objective of defeat for too little. And so Saddam
Hussein was left with the standing and the means to terrorize his

people and foment more trouble. In war there is much to be said for
magnanimity in victory. But not before victory.
*
*

See p. 800.

See pp. 89–90.

CHAPTER XXVIII

Men in Lifeboats
The background to and course of the 1990 Conservative Party
leadership campaign — and resignation

BACKGROUND TO THE 1990 LEADERSHIP CAMPAIGN
In 1975 I was the first candidate for the leadership of the Conservative
Party to challenge an existing leader under the rules which had been
instituted by Sir Alec Douglas-Home a decade earlier. Having entered
the field as a rank outsider, I won the leadership in an open contest. So
I am the last person to complain about having to meet a challenge to
my own leadership. But the circumstances of 1990, when Michael
Heseltine challenged me, were very different. I had won three general
elections and lost none, whereas Ted Heath had lost three out of four.
I was a sitting prime minister of eleven and a half years in office,
whereas Ted was a newly-defeated Opposition leader. The beliefs and
policies which I had pioneered in Britain were helping to remould
world affairs. And our country was at that moment on the verge of war
in the Gulf.
Of course, democracy is no respecter of persons, as my great
predecessor, Winston Churchill, learned when having led Britain
through her supreme struggle against the Nazi tyranny and in the
midst of negotiations crucial to the post-war world order, he was
defeated in the 1945 general election. At least, however, it was the
British people who dismissed him from office. I was not given the
opportunity to meet the voters — and they were not able to pronounce
on my final term of office, except by proxy.
The 1965 procedure for electing the Tory leader was, by unwritten
convention, not intended for use when the Party was in office.
Theoretically, I had to be re-elected every year; but since no one else
stood, this was a formality. Ever since Michael Heseltine flounced out
of the Cabinet in January 1986, however, he had kept up a constant if
unavowed campaign to replace me. Inevitably, as problems mounted
in late 1988 and 1989, closer attention was paid to the precise details
of the system.
I have already described the growth of political discontent in the
summer and autumn of 1989. Of its causes, the most important was
the economy, as high interest rates had to be applied to curb the
inflation which Nigel Lawson’s policy of shadowing the deutschmark
had generated. This aggravated what would otherwise have been more
manageable problems, such as the agitation over the community
charge — a running sore which would get much worse the following

year. There was also a hard core of opposition to my approach to the
European Community, though this was very much a minority view.
And there was, of course, a range of back-benchers who for various
idiosyncratic reasons, or because they had been denied or removed
from office, would be happy to line up against me. There was even
talk of one of them putting up for the leadership as a ‘stalking horse’
for the real contender, Michael Heseltine, lurking in the wings.
In fact, Sir Anthony Meyer decided to mount a challenge for reasons
of his own in 1989, and there had to be a contest. Mark Lennox-Boyd,
my PPS, George Younger, Ian Gow, Tristan Garel-Jones (a Foreign
Office Minister of State), Richard Ryder (Economic Secretary) and Bill
Shelton constituted my campaign team who quietly identified
supporters, waverers and opponents. They did their job well. I did not
myself campaign and no one seriously thought that I should. The
results were by no means unsatisfactory. I won 314 votes, Sir Anthony
Meyer 33. There were 24 spoilt ballots and 3 abstentions. But the
contest had revealed, as George Younger told me, a certain amount of
discontent.
Accordingly, I increased the amount of time set aside in my diary for
meeting back-benchers. I made more frequent visits to that fount of
gossip, the Commons tea-room. I also began regular meetings with
groups of back-benchers, usually recruited according to region so as to
ensure a wide spectrum of views. At these meetings, which usually
took place in my room in the House, I would ask everyone around the
table to speak their mind and then come in at the end to answer point
by point. There was frank speaking on both sides — on one occasion a
back-bencher told me it was time for me to go. I may not have
complied, but I did listen.
But no amount of discussion or attention to personal sensitivities
could compensate for the political situation in the summer of 1990.
High community charge bills made Conservative MPs anxious about
their seats. Inflation and interest rates were still high. Divisions in the
Parliamentary Party and the Government over Europe sharpened as
the pace of the federalist programme accelerated. The rank and file of
the Party was still with me, as they would show at the 1990 Party
Conference, indeed perhaps stronger than ever in their support. But
too many of my colleagues had an unspoken contempt for the party
faithful whom they regarded as organization fodder with no real right
to hold political opinions. And in the event, no one would seriously
listen to them — though they were formally consulted and pronounced
heavily in my favour — when it came for my fate to be decided.
For my part, I remained confident that we could ride out these
difficulties and win the next election. High interest rates were already
doing their work in bringing down inflation, whatever the headline
RPI figures showed. I was only waiting for signs that the money supply
was firmly under control before cutting interest rates — and
continuing to cut them even if that would entail a changed parity in

the ERM. At the end of April I had my first serious discussion with the
Policy Unit about policies that might be in the next manifesto. And
that summer I had discussions with colleagues on setting up manifesto
policy groups. My Party Conference speech in October 1990 raised the
curtain on just a little of this, outlining proposals for privatization,
training vouchers (and hinting at education vouchers), and increasing
the number of grant-maintained schools. I had not decided when we
would go to the country. But I wanted to be ready for the summer of
1991.
I had also been thinking about my future beyond the next election.
There was still much that I wanted to do. Most immediately, we had to
defeat Saddam Hussein and establish a durable security framework for
the Gulf. The economy was fundamentally strong, but I wanted to
overcome inflation and recession and restore a stable framework for
growth. I thought there was a good prospect of mopping up
communism in central and eastern Europe and establishing limited
government under law in the new democracies. Above all I hoped to
win the battle for my kind of European Community — one in which a
free and enterprising nation-state like Britain could comfortably
flourish. But I also knew that the wider framework of international
relations which was needed in the post-Cold War world — one in
which international bodies like the UN, the GATT, the IMF, the World
Bank, NATO and the CSCE held the ring, while nation-states and
international commerce were left to their own proper spheres of
activity — would not be built in a day. This was a substantial longterm programme.
My problem was the lack of a successor whom I could trust both to
keep my legacy secure and to build on it. I liked John Major and
thought that he genuinely shared my approach. But he was relatively
untested and his tendency to accept the conventional wisdom had
given me pause for thought. For reasons I have explained, however, no
other candidate found greater favour with me.* Given time, John
might grow in stature, or someone else might emerge. So, both
because of the scale of the challenges and my uncertainty over the
succession, I did not wish to step down before the next election.
Nor, however, did I seriously intend to go ‘on and on’. I thought that
about two years into the next Parliament would be the right time to
leave. Of course, even then it would be a wrench. I felt as full of
energy as ever. But I accepted that one day it would be my duty to
leave No. 10, whether the electorate had demanded it or not.
What would not persuade me to depart, however, was the kind of
argument put to me by Peter Carrington over dinner at his house one
Sunday evening in April 1990. Denis was not there: he was away for
the weekend. Peter argued that the Party wanted me to leave office
both with dignity and at a time of my own choosing. I took this to be a
coded message: dignity might suggest a rather earlier departure than I
would otherwise choose. Peter was, I suspect, speaking on behalf of at

least a section of the Tory establishment. My own feeling was that I
would go ‘when the time was ripe’. I reflected that if the great and the
good of the Tory Party had had their way, I would never have become
Party leader, let alone Prime Minister. Nor had I the slightest interest
in appearances nor in the trappings of office. I would fight — and, if
necessary, go down fighting — for my beliefs as long as I could.
‘Dignity’ did not come into it.
GEOFFREY HOWE’S RESIGNATION
The restiveness of Tory back-benchers was transformed into open
panic by the Eastbourne by-election later in October. Ian Gow’s old
seat went to the Liberals with a swing of 20 per cent. The opinion
polls also looked bad. Labour had a substantial lead. This was not a
happy background to the Rome summit which I attended over the
weekend of 27–28 October.** Yet even as I was fighting a lone battle in
Rome, Geoffrey Howe went on television and told Brian Waiden that
we did not in fact oppose the principle of a single currency, implying
that I would probably be won round. This was either disloyal or
remarkably stupid. At the first Prime Minister’s Questions on my
return, I was inevitably asked about his remarks. I countered
Opposition taunts by saying that Geoffrey was ‘too big a man to need a
little man like [Neil Kinnock] to stand up for him’. But I could not
endorse what he had said.
And my difficulties were just beginning. I now had to stand up in
the House and make my statement on the outcome of the Rome
summit. I duly stressed that ‘a single currency is not the policy of this
Government’. But this assertion — which I considered essential — had
two important qualifications. The first was that our own proposal for a
parallel or ‘common’ currency in the form of the hard ecu might
evolve towards a single currency. The second was a form of words,
which ministers had come to use, that we would not have a single
currency ‘imposed upon us’. And, inevitably, there were differing
interpretations of precisely what that delphic expression meant. Such
hypothetical qualifications could be used by someone like Geoffrey to
keep open the possibility that we would at some point end up with a
single currency. That was not our intention, and I felt there was a
basic dishonesty in this interpretation. It was the removal of this
camouflage which — if any single policy difference mattered —
probably provided the reason for Geoffrey’s resignation.
I said in reply to questions that ‘in my view [the hard ecu] would
not become widely used throughout the Community — possibly most
widely used for commercial transactions. Many people would continue
to prefer their own currency.’ I also expressed firm agreement with
Norman Tebbit when he made the vital point that ‘the mark of a single
currency is not only that all other currencies must be extinguished but
that the capacity of other institutions to issue currencies must also be

extinguished.’ My reply was: ‘This Government believes in the pound
sterling.’ And I vigorously rejected the Delors concept of a federal
Europe in which the European Parliament would be the Community’s
House of Representatives, the Commission its Executive, and the
Council of Ministers its Senate. ‘No, no, no,’ I said.
This performance set Geoffrey on the road to resignation. Exactly
why is still unclear, perhaps to him, certainly to me. I do not know
whether he actually wanted a single currency. Neither now or later, as
far as I am aware, did he ever say where he stood — only where I
should not stand. Perhaps the enthusiastic — indeed uproarious —
support I received from the back-benchers convinced him that he had
to strike at once, or I would win round the Parliamentary Party to the
platform I earlier set out in Bruges.
No matter what I had said, however, Geoffrey would sooner or later
have objected and gone. By this time the gap between us, unlike the
rows I had with Nigel Lawson, was as much a matter of personal
antipathy as of policy difference. I have explained how Geoffrey
reacted when I asked him to leave the Foreign Office.* He never put
his heart into the Leadership of the House. In the Cabinet he was now
a force for obstruction, in the Party a focus of resentment, in the
country a source of division. On top of all that, we found each other’s
company almost intolerable. I was surprised at the immediate grounds
of his resignation. But in some ways it is more surprising that he
remained so long in a position which he clearly disliked and resented.
I heard nothing of Geoffrey on Wednesday (31 October). On
Thursday morning at Cabinet I took him to task, probably too sharply,
about the preparation of the legislative programme. I was slightly
curious at the time that he had so little to say for himself. Afterwards,
I had lunch in the flat, worked on my speech for the debate on the
Loyal Address, had a short meeting with Douglas Hurd about the
situation in the Gulf, and then went off to Marsham Street where, in
the cellars beneath the DoE/Department of Transport complex, the
Gulf Embargo Surveillance unit was operating. I had not been there
long when a message came through that Geoffrey wanted urgently to
see me back at No. 10. He intended to resign.
I was back there at 5.50 p.m. for what turned out to be almost a
rerun of Nigel Lawson’s resignation. I asked Geoffrey to postpone his
decision till the following morning: I already had so much to think
about — surely a little more time was possible. But he insisted. He said
that he had already cancelled the speech he was due to give that
evening at the Royal Overseas League, and the news was bound to get
out. So the letters were prepared and his resignation was announced.
In a sense it was a relief he had gone. But I had no doubt of the
political damage it would do. All the talk of a leadership bid by
Michael Heseltine would start again. Apart from myself, Geoffrey was
the last survivor of the 1979 Cabinet. The press were bound to draw
disparaging attention to my longevity. It was impossible to know what

Geoffrey himself planned to do. But presumably he would not remain
silent. It was vital that the Cabinet reshuffle, made necessary by his
departure, should reassert my authority and unite the Party. That
would not be easy, and indeed the two objectives might by now be in
conflict.
I could not discuss all this with my advisers immediately, however,
because I had to host a reception at No. 10 for the Lord’s Taverners,
the charitable organization with which Denis was involved. But, as
soon as I could, I broke away and went to my study where Ken Baker,
John Wakeham and Alastair Goodlad, the Deputy Chief Whip, who
was standing in for Tim Renton, got down to discussing what must be
done.

I already knew my ideal solution: Norman Tebbit back in the
Cabinet as Education Secretary. Norman shared my views on Europe
— as on so much else; he was tough, articulate and trustworthy. He
would have made a superb Education Secretary who could sell his
programme to the country and wrong-foot the Labour Party. We could
not reach him that night but made contact the following morning
(Friday 2 November), and he agreed to come in and discuss it. As I
feared, he would not be persuaded. He had left the Cabinet to look
after his wife and that duty took precedence over all else. He would
give me all the support he could from outside, but he could not come
back into Government.
When Norman left, Tim Renton, the Chief Whip, now back in
London, came in. He had undoubtedly breathed a sigh of relief that
Norman was not coming back. He now argued strongly that William
Waldegrave — who was on the left of the Party — should join the
Cabinet. William was slim, cerebral and aloof — a sort of Norman St
John Stevas without jokes — and he seemed likely to be even less of
an ally. But I had never kept talented people out of my Cabinets just
because they were not of my way of thinking, and I was not going to
start even now. I asked him to take on the Department of Health.
But I still wanted a new face at Education, where John MacGregor’s
limitations as a public spokesman were costing us dear in an area of
great importance. So I appointed Ken Clarke — again not someone on
my wing of the Party, but an energetic and persuasive bruiser, very
useful in a brawl or an election. John MacGregor I moved to Geoffrey’s
old post as Leader of the House. The appointments were well received.
Although my preferred strategy of bringing back Norman had failed,
my objective of uniting the Party seemed to be succeeding.
Any prospect of a return to business as usual, however, was quickly
dispelled. I spent Saturday 3 November at Chequers working with my
advisers on my speech on the Address, which had, of course, now
assumed a new importance in the light of Geoffrey’s resignation. That
evening Bernard Ingham rang through to read me an open letter
Michael Heseltine had written to his constituency chairman. It was
ostensibly about the need for the Government to chart a new course on

Europe. In fact, it was the first tentative public step in the Heseltine
leadership bid. Sunday’s papers (4 November) were accordingly full of
stories about the leadership. They also contained the first opinion poll
findings taken after Geoffrey’s departure. Unsurprisingly, they were
very bad. Labour was shown in one to be 21 per cent ahead. I spent
the day working on another speech — on the environment — which I
was to deliver on Tuesday in Geneva.
On as many Monday mornings as possible I used to meet Ken Baker
and the Central Office team to look through the diary for the week
ahead. Over lunch I would also discuss the political situation with Ken,
the business managers and some other Cabinet colleagues. That
Monday we talked about almost everything except what was on
everyone’s mind — whether or not there would be a leadership
contest.
This was still far from certain. A feeling was now evident in the
British press that Michael had perhaps overplayed his hand in his open
letter. If he did not now stand, he would be accused of cowardice. If
he did stand, he would probably lose — despite the tremors over
Geoffrey’s departure. Most people felt that he would have been better
chancing his luck after a general election, which my enemies hoped
and expected I would lose.
This was the background to the discussion I had with Peter
Morrison, my PPS, and Cranley Onslow, Chairman of the ‘22, on
Tuesday afternoon (6 November) after a short visit to Geneva to
address the World Climate Conference. We were all concerned that the
speculation about the leadership was doing the Party and the
Government great harm. It seemed best to try to bring matters to a
head and get the leadership campaign — if there was to be one — out
of the way quickly. The contest had to take place within twenty-eight
days of the opening of the new parliamentary session, but it was up to
the leader of the Party in consultation with the Chairman of the ‘22 to
name the precise date. Accordingly, we agreed to bring forward the
date for the closing of nominations to Thursday 15 November, with
the first ballot on Tuesday 20 November. This meant that I would be
away in Paris for the CSCE summit when the first ballot — if there was
one — occurred. The disadvantage, of course, would be that I would
not be at Westminster to rally support. But Peter Morrison and I did
not in any case envisage that I would canvass on my own behalf. As
things turned out, this may have been a wrong judgement. But it is
important to understand why it was made.
First, it would have been absurd for a prime minister of eleven and a
half years’ standing — leader of the Party for over fifteen years — to
behave as if she were entering the lists for the first time. Tory MPs
knew me, my record and my beliefs. If they were not already
persuaded, there was not much left for me to persuade them with.
Prime ministers can seek to charm and be sure to listen: I had been
listening week after week to MPs’ grumbles; but I could not now

credibly tell an MP worried about the community charge that I had
been convinced by what he said and intended to scrap the whole
scheme. Nor would I have dreamt of doing so. Thus there were strict
limits on any canvassing I could usefully do to maximize my vote. A
challenger like Michael, however, could promise promotion to those
out of office as well as security for those already in it; he would be the
beneficiary of all the resentments of the back-benchers.
Second, I felt that, as in 1989, the most effective campaign would be
carried out by others on my behalf. In Peter Morrison I considered that
I had an experienced House of Commons man who could put together
a good team to work for me. Peter and I had been friends ever since he
entered the House. He had been one of the first back-benchers to urge
me to stand in 1975. I knew that I could rely on his loyalty.
Unfortunately, the same quality of serene optimism which made Peter
so effective at cheering us all up was not necessarily so suitable for
calculating the intentions of that most slippery of electorates —
Conservative MPs. I also envisaged, of course, that Peter would have
other heavyweights in my team, including George Younger who had
done such a good job in 1989.
The debate on the Address would give me an opportunity to renew
my authority and the Government’s momentum. So I put extra effort
into work on the speech. On the day itself (Wednesday 7 November), I
was helped by yet another feeble attack from Neil Kinnock whose
latest metamorphosis as a market socialist I mocked in the line: ‘The
Leader of the Opposition is fond of talking about supply-side socialism.
We know what that means: whatever the unions demand, Labour will
supply.’ But I also had to deal with the more delicate issue of
Geoffrey’s resignation. And that had hidden traps.
In his resignation letter Geoffrey had not spelt out any significant
policy differences between us. Instead, he had concentrated on what
he described as ‘the mood I had struck … in Rome last weekend and in
the House of Commons this Tuesday’. I therefore felt entitled to point
out in my speech that ‘if the Leader of the Opposition reads my Rt.
Hon. and learned friend’s letter, he will be very pressed indeed to find
any significant policy difference on Europe between my Rt. Hon. and
learned friend and the rest of us on this side.’
That was true as far as it went, and it supplied my immediate needs.
The debate went quite well. But it soon became clear that Geoffrey
was furious about what I had said. He apparently felt that there were
substantial points of difference on policy between us, even if he had
not so far managed to articulate what they were. We had reached
nothing more than a lull before a political storm that was to rage ever
more strongly.
At the end of Thursday’s Cabinet (8 November), we took the
unusual step of adjourning for a political session, civil servants leaving
the Cabinet Room. Ken Baker warned of the likelihood of extremely
bad results at the Bootle and Bradford North by-elections. Things

turned out as he feared. The worst result was in Bradford, where we
slumped to third place. Early the next morning (Friday 9 November),
Ken telephoned me to discuss these results which I had, as usual,
stayed up to see. I put on a brave face, saying it was no worse than I
expected. But it was bad enough, and at the wrong time.
What really set the political commentators talking, however, was a
statement that day by Geoffrey that he would ‘be seeking an
opportunity in the course of the next few days to explain in the House
of Commons the reasons — of substance as well as style — which
prompted [his] difficult decision’. The speculation that Michael
Heseltine would stand naturally increased over the weekend. Indeed,
politics entered one of those febrile nervous phases in which events
seem to be moving towards some momentous but unknowable climax
almost independent of the wishes of the actors. And there was little I
could do about any of this. I soldiered on with my arranged
programme in the constituency on Saturday (10 November) and at the
Cenotaph Remembrance Day Service on Sunday (11 November).
On Monday (12 November), as the previous week, there was only
one subject on our minds at my morning ‘Week Ahead’ meeting with
Ken Baker and at the subsequent lunch with colleagues — and again,
significantly, none of us really wished to talk about it. No one knew as
yet what Geoffrey would say, or even when he would say it. But never
had a speech by Geoffrey been so eagerly awaited.
I delivered my own speech at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet in Guildhall
that evening, striking a deliberately defiant note. But words now
began to fail me. I employed a cricketing metaphor which that evening
drew warm applause but which would later be turned to my
disadvantage:
I am still at the crease, though the bowling has been pretty hostile of late.
And in case anyone doubted it, can I assure you there will be no ducking
bouncers, no stonewalling, no playing for time. The bowling’s going to get
hit all round the ground.

THE LEADERSHIP CAMPAIGN OPENS
I had now learned that Geoffrey would speak in the House the
following day, Tuesday 13 November, about his resignation. I would,
of course, stay on after Questions to hear him.
Geoffrey’s speech was a powerful Commons performance — the
most powerful of his career. If it failed in its ostensible purpose of
explaining the policy differences that had provoked his resignation, it
succeeded in its real purpose which was to damage me. It was cool,
forensic, light at points, and poisonous. His long suppressed rancour
gave Geoffrey’s words more force than he had ever managed before.
He turned the cricketing metaphor against me with a QC’s skill,
claiming that my earlier remarks about the hard ecu undermined the
Chancellor and the Governor of the Bank of England: ‘It is rather like

sending your opening batsmen to the crease only for them to find, the
moment the first balls are bowled, that their bats have been broken
before the game by the team captain.’ He persuasively caricatured my
arguments of principle against Europe’s drift to federalism as mere tics
of temperamental obstinacy. And his final line — ‘the time has come
for others to consider their own response to the tragic conflict of
loyalties with which I have myself wrestled for perhaps too long’ —
was an open invitation to Michael Heseltine to stand against me that
electrified the House of Commons.
It was a peculiar experience listening to this bill of particulars,
rather like being the accused during a prosecutor’s summing up in a
capital case. For I was as much the focus of attention as was Geoffrey.
If the world was listening to him, it was watching me. And underneath
the mask of composure, my emotions were turbulent. I had not the
slightest doubt that the speech was deeply damaging to me. One part
of my mind was making the usual political calculations of how I and
my colleagues should react to it in the lobbies. Michael Heseltine had
been handed more than an invitation to enter the lists; he had been
given a weapon as well. How would we blunt it?
At a deeper level than calculation, however, I was hurt and shocked.
Perhaps in view of the irritability that had been the coin of my
relations with Geoffrey in recent years, I was foolish to be so pierced.
But any ill-feeling between us had been expressed behind closed doors,
even if news of it had sometimes leaked into political gossip columns.
In public, I had been strongly supportive of him both as Chancellor
and as Foreign Secretary. Indeed, the memory of the battles we had
fought alongside each other in Opposition and in the early 1980s had
persuaded me to keep him in the Cabinet as Deputy Prime Minister
when a closer attention to my own political interests on Europe,
exchange rates, and a host of other issues would have led me to
replace him with someone more of my way of thinking.
Yet he had not been similarly swayed by those memories. After
living through so many difficult times and sharing so many policy
successes, he had deliberately set out to bring down a colleague in this
brutal and public way. And with what result? It was not yet certain
what would happen to me. Whatever it was, however, Geoffrey Howe
from this point on would be remembered not for his staunchness as
Chancellor, nor for his skilful diplomacy as Foreign Secretary, but for
this final act of bile and treachery. The very brilliance with which he
wielded the dagger ensured that the character he assassinated was in
the end his own.
The following morning (Wednesday 14 November) Cranley Onslow
telephoned to say that he had received formal notification of Michael
Heseltine’s intention to stand for the leadership. Douglas Hurd now
proposed my nomination; John Major seconded it; this was intended
as a demonstration of the Cabinet’s united support for me. Peter
Morrison quickly had my own leadership team up and running, though

some people subsequently suggested that this was too energetic a
metaphor. The key figures were to be George Younger, Michael
Jopling, John Moore, Norman Tebbit and Gerry Neale. MPs would be
discreetly asked their views so that we knew who were supporters,
waverers and opponents. Michael Neubert was to keep the tally.
Opponents would not be approached again, but waverers were to be
called on by whichever member of the team seemed most likely to be
persuasive.
It was agreed that I would use press interviews as the main platform
for me to set out my case. So on Thursday evening (15 November) I
was interviewed by Michael Jones of the Sunday Times and Charles
Moore of the Sunday Telegraph. Nor did I back away from the
European issue which Geoffrey’s speech had reopened. Indeed, I said
that a referendum would be necessary before there was any question
of our having a single currency. This was a constitutional issue, not
just an economic one, and it would be wrong not to consult the people
directly.
When the nuts and bolts of my campaign were explained to me, they
sounded fine. Unfortunately, it was not clear how much time some of
the main members of my team could give to the campaign. Norman
Fowler had been approached by Peter and agreed to be part of it, but
then dropped out immediately, claiming past friendship with Geoffrey
Howe. George Younger, about to become Chairman of the Royal Bank
of Scotland, was heavily involved in his business affairs. Michael
Jopling too bowed out. John Moore was not always in the country.
Subsequently, a number of my younger supporters in the ‘No Turning
Back Group’ of MPs, alarmed at the way my campaign was going,
drafted themselves as helpers and pulled out every stop. Their help
was welcome; but why had it become necessary? This should have
been a warning sign. But the campaign played on, and I carried on
with the arrangements already in my diary, spending Friday 16
November on a visit to Northern Ireland.
Meanwhile, Michael Heseltine’s campaign was in full swing. He had
promised a fundamental review of the community charge and was
talking about transferring the cost of services like education to central
taxation. I had already noted in the House that this could mean an
extra 5 pence on income tax or large cuts in other public spending —
or a budget deficit just when we had enjoyed four years of surplus and
had redeemed debt.
I now pressed home the attack on Michael’s approach in a Times
interview with Simon Jenkins where I drew attention to Michael’s
long-standing corporatist and interventionist views. This appeared on
Monday and was promptly criticized in some circles as being too
aggressive. But there was nothing remotely personal about it. Michael
Heseltine and I disagreed fundamentally about all that is at the heart
of politics. MPs should be reminded that this was a contest between
two philosophies as well as between two personalities. It was a sign of

the funk and frivolity of the whole exercise that they did not want to
think anything was at stake apart from their seats.
On Saturday evening 17 November Denis and I had friends and
advisers to dinner at Chequers — Peter Morrison, the Bakers, the
Wakehams, Alistair McAlpine, Gordon Reece, the Bells, the Neuberts,
the Neales, John Whittingdale and of course Mark and Carol. (George
Younger could not attend because he had another engagement in
Norfolk.) We had an enjoyable dinner, and then got down to business.
My team gave me a run down on the figures which seemed quite
favourable. Peter Morrison told me he thought he had 220 votes for,
110 against and 40 abstentions, which would be an easy win. (To win
in the first round I would need a majority of at least 15 per cent of
those entitled to vote.) Even allowing for a ‘lie factor’, then, I would be
all right. But I was not convinced, telling Peter: ‘I remember Ted
thought the same thing. Don’t trust our figures — some people are on
the books of both sides.’ Everybody else seemed to be far more
confident, and indeed spent their time discussing what should be done
to unite the Party after my victory. I hoped they were right. Some
instinct told me otherwise.
AT THE CSCE SUMMIT IN PARIS
The next day (Sunday 18 November) I departed for the CSCE summit
in Paris. It marked the formal — though sadly not the actual —
beginning of that new era which was termed by President Bush a ‘new
world order’. In Paris far-reaching decisions were taken to shape the
post-Cold War Europe which had emerged from the peaceful defeat of
communism. These included deep mutual cuts in conventional armed
forces within the CFE framework, a European ‘Magna Carta’
guaranteeing political rights and economic freedom (an idea I had
particularly championed), and the establishment of CSCE mechanisms
to promote conciliation, to prevent conflict, to facilitate free elections,
and to encourage consultations between governments and
parliamentarians.
As usual, I had a series of bilateral meetings with heads of
government. The Gulf was almost always at the forefront of our
discussions, though my mind kept turning to what was happening
back in Westminster. On Monday (19 November) I had breakfast with
President Bush, signed on behalf of the United Kingdom the historic
agreement to reduce conventional forces in Europe, attended the first
plenary session of the CSCE, and lunched with the other leaders at the
Elysée Palace. In the afternoon I made my own speech to the summit,
looking back over the long-term benefits of the Helsinki process,
emphasizing the continued importance of human rights and the rule of
law, pointing to their connection with economic freedom, and warning
against any attempt to downgrade NATO which was ‘the core of
western defence’. I later talked with the UN Secretary-General about

the situation in the Gulf before entertaining Chancellor Kohl to dinner
at the British Embassy.
It was characteristic of Helmut Kohl that, unlike the other leaders I
had met, he came straight to the point, namely the leadership election.
He said it was good to talk about these difficult issues rather than
bottle them up. He had been determined to devote this evening to me
as a way of demonstrating his complete support. It was unimaginable
that I should be deprived of office.
Given that the Chancellor and I had strong differences on the future
course of the European Community and that my departure would
remove an obstacle to his plans — as, indeed, proved to be case — this
was big-hearted of him. With a more serpentine politician, I would
have assumed this to be merely insurance against my victory. But
Chancellor Kohl, whether as ally or opponent, was never devious. So I
was very moved by his words, and by the real warmth of his feeling. I
tried to overcome my confusion by explaining the peculiarities of the
Tory leadership electoral system, but he said that my account only
confirmed his suspicion that the system was quite mad. By now I had
concluded he had a point. Then, somewhat to my relief, the
conversation turned to the prospects for the IGCs and economic and
monetary union, where Chancellor Kohl seemed willing to make
compromises, at least on timing. Whether anything more would have
come of it than from earlier assurances I cannot say; but I like to think
it would have done.
The following day I would know the results of the first ballot. Peter
had spoken to me on the telephone on Monday evening, and he was
still radiating confidence. It had already been arranged that he would
come out to Paris to be there to give me ‘the good news’, which would
be telephoned through to him from the Whips’ Office. It had also been
agreed precisely what I would do and say in the event of various
eventualities — ranging from an overwhelming victory to a defeat on
the first round. Knowing there was nothing more I could do, I threw
all my energies on Tuesday into more meetings with heads of
government and the CSCE proceedings. In the morning (Tuesday 20
November) I had talks with President Gorbachev, President Mitterrand
and President Ozal, and lunch with the Dutch Prime Minister, Ruud
Lubbers. After lunch I had a talk with President Zhelev of Bulgaria
who said that President Reagan and I shared the responsibility for
delivering freedom to eastern Europe and no one would ever forget
that. Perhaps it took the leader of a country which had been crushed
for decades under communist terror to understand just what had
happened in the world and why.
The afternoon’s session of the CSCE closed at 4.30. After tea and
some discussion with my advisers of the day’s events, I went upstairs
to my room at the residence to have my hair done. Just after 6 o’clock
I went up to a room set aside for me to await the results. Bernard
Ingham, Charles Powell, our ambassador Sir Ewen Fergusson, Crawfie

and Peter were there. Peter had a line open to the Chief Whip, and
Charles had another to John Whittingdale back in London. I sat at a
desk with my back to the room and got on with some work. Although I
did not realize it then, Charles received the results first. Out of my
sight, he gave a sad thumbs down to people in the room, but waited
for Peter to get the news officially. Then I heard Peter Morrison
receive the information from the Whips’ Office. He read out the
figures: I had 204 votes, Michael Heseltine 152, and there were 16
abstentions.
‘Not quite as good as we had hoped,’ said Peter, for once a master of
understatement, and handed a note of the results to me. I quickly did
the sums in my head. I had beaten Michael Heseltine and achieved a
clear majority of the Parliamentary Party (indeed, I got more votes in
defeat than John Major later won in victory); but I had not won by a
margin sufficient to avoid a second ballot. If I had held two votes that
in the event had gone to Michael, I would have beaten him by the
required amount. But there was little point now in making precise
calculations on the consequences of the want of a nail. A short silence
followed.
It was broken by Peter Morrison’s trying to telephone Douglas
Hurd’s room in the residence but finding that Douglas was on the line
to John Major in Great Stukeley, where the Chancellor was recovering
from an operation to remove his wisdom teeth. A few minutes later we
got through to Douglas who at once came along to see me. I did not
need to ask for his continued support. He declared that I should stand
in the second ballot and promised his own, and John Major’s, support.
He proved as good as his word, and I was glad to have such a staunch
friend by my side. Having thanked him and after a little more
discussion I went down, as previously planned, to meet the press and
make my statement:
Good evening gentlemen. I am naturally very pleased that I got more than
half the Parliamentary Party and disappointed that it is not quite enough to
win on the first ballot, so I confirm it is my intention to let my name go
forward for the second ballot.
Douglas followed me and said:
I would just like to make a brief comment on the ballot result. The Prime
Minister continues to have my full support, and I am sorry that this
destructive, unnecessary contest should be prolonged in this way.

I went back upstairs to my room and made a number of telephone
calls, including one to Denis. There was little to be said. The dangers
were all too obvious, and the telephone was not right for a heart-toheart discussion of what to do. Anyway, everyone in London knew
from my statement that I would carry on.
I changed out of the black wool suit with its tan and black collar
which I was wearing when the bad news came through. Although

somewhat stunned, I was perhaps less distressed than I might have
expected. The evidence is that whereas other outfits which evoke sad
memories never see the light of day again, I still wear that black wool
suit with the tan and black collar. But now I had to be in evening dress
for dinner at the Palace of Versailles, before which a ballet was to be
performed. I sent ahead to President Mitterrand warning him that I
would be late and asking that they start without me.
Before leaving for Versailles, I went in to see my old friend Eleanor
(the late Lady) Glover at whose Swiss home I had spent so many
enjoyable hours on holiday and who had come round from her Paris
flat to comfort me. We talked for just a few minutes in the
ambassador’s sitting-room. Her maid, Marta, who was with her, had
‘seen it in the cards’. I thought it might be useful to get Marta on the
campaign team.
At 8 o’clock I left the embassy with Peter Morrison to be driven at
break-neck speed in a big black Citroën with outriders through the
empty Paris streets, cleared for Presidents Bush and Gorbachev. But
my mind was in London. I knew that our only chance was if the
campaign were to go into high gear and every potential supporter
pressed to fight for my cause. Again and again, I stressed this to Peter:
‘We have got to fight.’ Some twenty minutes later we arrived at
Versailles where President Mitterrand was waiting for me. ‘Of course
we would never have started without you,’ the President said, and
with the considerable charm at his command, he accompanied me
inside as if I had just won an election instead of half-losing one.
It will be imagined that I could not give the whole of my attention
to the ballet. Even the dinner afterwards, always a memorable event at
President Mitterrand’s table, was something of a strain. The press and
photographers were waiting for us as we left, and they showed a
special interest in me. Realizing this, George and Barbara Bush, who
were just about to leave, swept me up to come out with them. It was
one of those little acts of kindness which remind us that even power
politics is not just about power.
From Paris the arrangements were now being made for my return to
London. I would attend the signing ceremony for the Final Document
of the summit but cut out the previously planned press conference so
as to get back to London early. A meeting had been arranged with
Norman Tebbit and John Wakeham immediately on my return, and
they would be joined later by Ken Baker, John MacGregor, Tim Renton
and Cranley Onslow. Meanwhile, three trawls of opinion were being
made. For my campaign team Norman Tebbit would assess my support
in the Parliamentary Party; Tim Renton would do the same for the
whips; and the Cabinet would be canvassed by John MacGregor. This
last task was, in fact, meant to be the responsibility of John Wakeham,
whom I had decided to involve much more closely in my campaign;
but because he was preparing for an announcement on electricity
privatization, he delegated it to John MacGregor.

I now know that this was the time when other ministers back in
London were preparing to abandon my cause. But I knew nothing of
that when I went to bed late that Tuesday night. My first inkling of
what was taking place came the next morning when my Private Office
told me that in accordance with my request they had telephoned Peter
Lilley — a card-carrying Thatcherite whom I had appointed to succeed
Nick Ridley at Trade and Industry in July 1990 — to ask him to help
with the drafting of my speech for that Thursday’s No Confidence
debate. Peter had apparently replied that he saw no point in this
because I was finished. Coming from such a source, this upset me
more than I can say. It was going to be even more difficult than I had
imagined in my worst nightmares.
CONSULTATIONS ON RETURN TO DOWNING STREET
I arrived at No. 10 just before midday (Wednesday 21 November). At
Peter Morrison’s suggestion, I had agreed that I should see members of
the Cabinet one by one on my return. The arrangements were made as
soon as I got back to London where first appearances were deceptive.
The staff of No. 10 clapped and cheered as I arrived; a thousand red
roses had arrived from one supporter; and as the long day wore on a
constantly increasing flow of other bouquets lined every corridor and
staircase.
I went straight up to the flat to see Denis. Affection never blunted
honesty between us. His advice was that I should withdraw. ‘Don’t go
on, love,’ he said. But I felt in my bones that I should fight on. My
friends and supporters expected me to fight, and I owed it to them to
do so as long as there was a chance of victory. But was there?
After a few minutes I went down to the study with Peter Morrison
where Norman Tebbit and John Wakeham soon joined us. Norman
gave me his assessment. He said that it was very difficult to know how
my vote stood with MPs, but many would fight every inch of the way
for me. My biggest area of weakness was among Cabinet ministers.
The objective must be to stop Michael Heseltine, and Norman thought
I had the best chance of doing so. I was quite frank with him in return.
I said that if I could see the Gulf crisis through and inflation brought
down, I would be able to choose the time of my departure. In
retrospect, I can see this was a kind of code assuring them that I would
resign not long after the next election.
But we had to consider other possibilities. If Michael Heseltine was
unthinkable, who could best stop him? Neither Norman nor I believed
that Douglas could beat Michael. Moreover, much though I admired
Douglas’s character and ability, and grateful as I was to him for his
loyalty, I doubted whether he would carry on the policies in which I
believed. And that was a vital consideration to me — it was, indeed,
the consideration that prompted me to look favourably on John Major.

What of him? If I withdrew, would he be able to win? His prospects
were, at best, still uncertain. So I concluded that the right option was
for me to stay in the fight.
John Wakeham said that we should think about the wider meeting
just about to start. I should prepare myself for the argument that I
would be humiliated if I fought. It was the first time I was to hear the
argument that day; but not the last. John, himself, was inclined to
reject this logic — he said that one was never humiliated by fighting
for what one believed in — at least while it was still hypothetical.
Norman, John, Peter and I then went down to the Cabinet Room
where we were joined by Ken Baker, John MacGregor, Tim Renton,
Cranley Onslow and John Moore. Ken opened the discussion by saying
that the key issue was how to stop Michael Heseltine. In his view, I
was the only person who could do this. Douglas Hurd did not want the
job badly enough, and in any case he represented the old wing of the
Party. John Major would attract more support: he was closer to my
views and had few enemies, but he was short of experience. Ken said
that two things were needed for my victory: my campaign needed a
major overhaul and I must give an undertaking to look radically at the
community charge. He advised against a high-profile media campaign.
John MacGregor then spoke. He said that he had done his trawl of
Cabinet ministers who in turn had consulted their junior ministers. He
said that there were very few who were proposing to shift their
allegiance, but the underlying problem was that they had no faith in
my ultimate success. They were concerned that my support was
eroding. In fact, I subsequently learnt that this was not the full picture.
John MacGregor had found a large minority of Cabinet ministers
whose support was shaky — either because they actually wanted me
out, or because they genuinely believed that I could not beat Michael
Heseltine, or because they favoured an alternative candidate. He did
not feel able to convey this information frankly in front of Tim Renton,
or indeed of Cranley Onslow, and he had not managed to contact me
with this information in advance. This was important because if we
had known the true picture earlier in the day, we might have thought
twice about asking Cabinet ministers individually for their support.
The discussion continued. Tim Renton gave a characteristically
dispiriting assessment. He said that the Whips’ Office had received
many messages from back-benchers and ministers saying that I should
withdraw from the contest. They doubted if I could beat Michael
Heseltine and they wanted a candidate around whom the Party could
unite. He said that the trend was worsening, but conceded that with
the vote five days away support could be won back by a better focused
campaign fought by the younger members.
But then came the rest of his message. He said that Willie Whitelaw
had asked to see him. Willie was worried that I might be humiliated in
the second ballot — it was touching that so many people seemed to be
worried about my humiliation — and feared that even if I won by a

small margin, it would be difficult for me to unite the Party. He did
not want to be cast in the role of a ‘man in a grey suit’. But, if asked,
he would come in and see me ‘as a friend’.
Cranley Onslow then gave his assessment. He said that he brought
no message from the committee that I should stand down — the
reverse, if anything, was true; but nor did they wish to convey any
message to Michael Heseltine. In effect, with the ballot going ahead
and the result uncertain, the ‘22 was declaring its neutrality. Cranley
gave his own view that the quality of a Heseltine administration would
be inferior to one led by me. As for issues, he did not believe that
Europe was the main one: it would not be crucial in a general election.
Most people were worried about the community charge and he hoped
that something substantial could be done about that. I intervened to
say that I could not pull rabbits out of a hat in five days. John
MacGregor supported me: I could not now credibly promise a radical
overhaul of the community charge, no matter how convenient it
seemed.
John Wakeham said that the big issue was whether there was a
candidate with a better chance of beating Michael Heseltine. He saw
no sign of this. Everything, therefore, hung on strengthening my
campaign which could only succeed if all my colleagues fought hard
for me. Both Ken Baker and John Moore gave their views about the
people I needed to win over. Ken noted that those who feared that I
could not win were my strongest supporters — people like Norman
Lamont, John Gummer, Michael Howard and Peter Lilley. John Moore
stressed that I needed complete commitment from ministers,
particularly junior ministers, in order to succeed. Norman Tebbit came
in at the end. Like Cranley, he believed that Europe had faded as an
issue in the leadership campaign: the only other major policy issue
was the community charge where Michael’s promise of action was
proving particularly attractive to MPs from the North-West. In spite of
this, however, Norman declared firmly that I could carry more votes
against Michael, provided that most of my senior colleagues swung
behind me.
The message of the meeting, even from those urging me to fight on,
was implicitly demoralizing. Though I had never been defeated in a
general election, retained the support of the Party in the country, and
had just won the support of a majority of the Party in Parliament, the
best thing to be said for me, apparently, was that I was better placed
than other candidates to beat Michael Heseltine. But even this was
uncertain since my strongest supporters doubted I could win, and
others believed that even if I succeeded in that, I would be unable to
unite the Party afterwards for the general election. And hanging over
all this was the dread much-invoked spectre of ‘humiliation’ if I were
to fight and lose. I drew the meeting to a close, saying I would reflect
on what I had heard. In retrospect, I can see that my resolve had been
weakened by these meetings. As yet I was still inclined to fight on. But

I felt that the decision would really be made at the meetings with my
Cabinet colleagues that evening.
Before then I had to make my statement in the House on the
outcome of the Paris summit. Leaving No. 10 I called out to the
assembled journalists in Downing Street: ‘I fight on, I fight to win,’ and
was interested to see later on the news that I looked a good deal more
confident than I felt.
The statement was not an easy occasion, except for the Opposition.
People were more interested in my intentions than in my words.
Afterwards, I went back to my room in the House where I was met by
Norman Tebbit. It was time — perhaps high time — for me to seek
support for my leadership personally. Norman and I began to go round
the tea-room. I had never experienced such an atmosphere before.
Repeatedly I heard: ‘Michael has asked me two or three times for my
vote already. This is the first time we have seen you.’ Members whom
I had known well for many years seemed to have been bewitched by
Michael’s flattery and promises. That at least was my first reaction.
Then I realized that many of these were supporters complaining that
my campaign did not seem to be really fighting. They were in a kind
of despair because we had apparently given up the ghost.
I returned to my room. I now had no illusion as to how bad the
position was. If there was to be any hope, I had to put my whole
campaign on a new footing even at this late stage. I therefore asked
John Wakeham, whom I believed had the authority and knowledge to
do this, to take charge. He agreed but said that he needed people to
help him: physically, he had never entirely recovered from the
Brighton bomb. So he went off to ask Tristan Garel-Jones and Richard
Ryder — both of whom had been closely involved in the 1989
leadership campaign — to be his chief lieutenants.
I now saw Douglas Hurd and asked him formally to nominate me for
the second ballot. This he agreed to do at once and with good grace.
Then I telephoned John Major at home outside Huntingdon. I told him
that I had decided to stand again and that Douglas was going to
propose me. I asked John to second my nomination. There was a
moment’s silence. The hesitation was palpable. No doubt the operation
on John’s wisdom teeth was giving him trouble. Then he said that if
that was what I wanted, yes. Later, when urging my supporters to vote
for John for the leadership, I made play of the fact that he did not
hesitate. But both of us knew otherwise.
I now went to the Palace for an audience with the Queen at which I
informed her that I would stand in the second ballot, as indeed I still
intended to do. Then I returned to my room in the House to see the
Cabinet one by one.
THE VIEWS OF THE CABINET

I could, of course, have concentrated my efforts for the second ballot
on winning over the back-benchers directly. Perhaps I should have
done. But the earlier meetings had persuaded me that it was essential
to mobilize Cabinet ministers not just to give formal support, but also
to go out and persuade junior ministers and back-benchers to back me.
In asking for their support, however, I was also putting myself at their
mercy. If a substantial number of Cabinet colleagues refused their
backing, there could be no disguising the fact afterwards. I recalled a
complaint from Churchill, then Prime Minister, to his Chief Whip that
talk of his resignation in the Parliamentary Party — he would shortly
be succeeded by Anthony Eden — was undermining his authority.
Without that authority, he could not be an effective prime minister.
Similarly, a prime minister who knows that his or her Cabinet has
withheld its support is fatally weakened. I knew — and I am sure they
knew — that I would not willingly remain an hour in 10 Downing
Street without real authority to govern.
As I have said, I had spoken to Douglas Hurd and John Major
already, though I had not directly sought their views about what I
should do. I had already seen Cecil Parkinson after returning from the
tea-room. He told me that I should remain in the race, that I could
count on his unequivocal support and that it would be a hard struggle
but that I could win. Nick Ridley, no longer in the Cabinet but a figure
of more than equivalent weight, also assured me of his complete
support. Ken Baker had made clear his total commitment to me. The
Lord Chancellor and Lord Belstead, Leader of the Lords, were not
really significant players in the game. And John Wakeham was my
campaign manager. But all the others I would see in my room in the
House of Commons.
Over the next two hours or so, each Cabinet minister came in, sat
down on the sofa in front of me and gave me his views. Almost to a
man they used the same formula. This was that they themselves would
back me, of course, but that regretfully they did not believe I could
win.
In fact, as I well realized, they had been feverishly discussing what
they should say in the rooms off the Commons Cabinet corridor above
my room. Like all politicians in a quandary, they had sorted out their
‘line to take’ and they would cling to it through thick and thin. After
three or four interviews, I felt I could almost join in the chorus.
Whatever the monotony of the song, however, the tone and human
reactions of those who came into my room that evening offered
dramatic contrasts.
My first ministerial visitor was not a member of the Cabinet at all.
Francis Maude, Angus’s son and Minister of State at the Foreign Office,
whom I regarded as a reliable ally, told me that he passionately
supported the things I believed in, that he would back me as long as I
went on, but that he did not believe I could win. He left in a state of
some distress; nor had he cheered me up noticeably.

Ken Clarke now entered. His manner was robust in the brutalist
style he has cultivated: the candid friend. He said that this method of
changing prime ministers was farcical, and that he personally would
be happy to support me for another five or ten years. Most of the
Cabinet, however, thought that I should stand down. Otherwise, not
only would I lose; I would ‘lose big’. If that were to happen, the Party
would go to Michael Heseltine and end up split. So Douglas and John
should be released from their obligation to me and allowed to stand,
since either had a better chance than I did. Then the solid part of the
Party could get back together. Contrary to persistent rumours, Ken
Clarke at no point threatened to resign.
Peter Lilley, obviously ill at ease, came in next. From the message I
had received in Paris, I knew roughly what to expect from him. He
duly announced that he would support me if I stood but that it was
inconceivable that I would win. Michael Heseltine must not be allowed
to get the leadership or all my achievements would be threatened. The
only way to prevent this was to make way for John Major.
Of course, I had not been optimistic about Ken Clarke and Peter
Lilley for quite different reasons. But I had written off my next visitor,
Malcolm Rifkind, in advance. After Geoffrey’s departure, Malcolm was
probably my sharpest personal critic in the Cabinet and he did not
soften his criticism on this occasion. He said bluntly that I could not
win, and that either John or Douglas would do better. Still, even
Malcolm did not declare against me. When I asked him whether I
would have, his support if I did stand, he said that he would have to
think about it. Indeed, he gave the assurance that he would never
campaign against me. Silently, I thanked God for small mercies.
After so much commiseration, it was a relief to talk to Peter Brooke.
He was, as always, charming, thoughtful and loyal. He said he would
fully support me whatever I chose to do. Being in Northern Ireland, he
was not closely in touch with parliamentary opinion and could not
himself offer an authoritative view of my prospects. But he believed I
could win if I went ahead with all guns blazing. Could I win if all guns
did not blaze? That was something I was myself beginning to doubt.
My next visitor was Michael Howard, another rising star who shared
my convictions. Michael’s version of the Cabinet theme was altogether
stronger and more encouraging. Although he doubted my prospects,
he himself would not only support me but would campaign vigorously
for me.
William Waldegrave, my most recent Cabinet appointment, arrived
next. William was very formal. I could hardly expect more from
someone who did not share my political views. But he declared very
straightforwardly that it would be dishonourable for someone to
accept a place in my Cabinet one week and not support me three
weeks later. He would vote for me as long as I was a candidate. But he
had a sense of foreboding about the result. It would be a catastrophe if

corporatist policies took over, which, of course, was another way of
saying that Michael Heseltine should be held at bay.
At this point I received a note from John Wakeham who wanted an
urgent word with me. Apparently, the position was much worse than
he had thought. I was not surprised. It was hardly any better from
where I was sitting.
John Gummer bounced in next. His position was, on the face of it,
not easy to predict. He was a passionate European, but he apparently
shared the same general philosophy of government as I did. In fact I
was mildly curious as to how he would resolve this tension. But he
reeled off the standard formula that he would support me if I decided
to stand, but as a friend he should warn me that I could not win, and
so I should move aside and let John and Douglas stand.
John Gummer was followed by Chris Patten. Chris and I had worked
together for many years from the time when he was Director of the
Conservative Research Department until I brought him into the
Cabinet in 1989. He had a way with words, and perhaps this had too
easily convinced me that he and I always put the same construction
upon them. But he was a man of the Left. So I could hardly complain
when he told me that he would support me but that I could not win,
and so on.
Even melodramas have intervals, even Macbeth has the porter’s
scene. I now had a short talk with Alan Clark, Minister of State at the
Ministry of Defence, and a gallant friend, who came round to lift my
spirits with the encouraging advice that I should fight on at all costs.
Unfortunately, he went on to argue that I should fight on even though
I was bound to lose because it was better to go out in a blaze of
glorious defeat than to go gentle into that good night. Since I had no
particular fondness for Wagnerian endings, this lifted my spirits only
briefly. But I was glad to have someone unambiguously on my side
even in defeat.
By now John Wakeham and Ken Baker had turned up to speak to
me, and their news was not good. John said that he now doubted
whether I could get the support of the Cabinet. What I had been
hearing did not suggest that he was wrong. He added that he had tried
to put together a campaign team but was not succeeding even at that. I
had realized by now that I was not dealing with Polish cavalrymen;
but I was surprised that neither Tristan Garel-Jones nor Richard Ryder
were prepared to serve as John’s lieutenants because they believed I
could not win.
Tristan Garel-Jones had, of course, served on my campaign team the
previous year when my position was not seriously under threat.
Nonetheless, I could not find it in my heart to be really disappointed
in him now. His view of Conservative politics had always been that the
line of least resistance is the best course, and I suppose he was only
being consistent. But it was a personal as well as a political blow to

learn that Richard, who had come with me to No. 10 all those years
ago as my political secretary and whom I had moved up the ladder as
quickly as I decently could, was deserting at the first whiff of
grapeshot.
Ken Baker went on to report that the position had deteriorated since
we had spoken that morning. He had found between ten and twelve
members of the Cabinet who did not think I could win. And if they
thought that, there would not be enough enthusiasm to carry the day.
Even so he believed that I should carry on. But he floated Tom King’s
suggestion — which I was myself to hear from Tom a little later —
that I should promise to stand down after Christmas if I won. The idea
was that this would allow me to see through the Gulf War. I could not
accept this: I would have no authority in the meantime and I would
need all I could muster for the forthcoming battles in the European
Community.
After John and Ken had left, Norman Lamont came in and repeated
the formula. The position, he said, was beyond repair. Everything we
had achieved on industry and Europe would be jeopardized by a
victory for Michael Heseltine. Everything but Robertson Hare’s ‘Oh
Calamity.’
John MacGregor now appeared and somewhat belatedly gave me
the news that I lacked support in the Cabinet which he had felt unable
to convey to me earlier in the day. He too eschewed any originality
and stuck by the formula. Tom King said the usual things, though
more warmly than most. He added the suggestion trailed by Ken Baker
that I should offer to stand down at a specific date in the future. I
rejected this suggestion, but I was grateful for the diversion.
In all the circumtances, it was a relief to see David Waddington
enter and sit down on the sofa. Here was a steadfast friend but, as I
quickly saw, one in the deepest distress. All David’s instincts were to
fight on. For him the argument that battle should not be joined
because defeat was likely had none of the attraction that it did for
some of his colleagues. It was not an evasion, nor a disguised threat,
nor a way of abandoning my cause without admitting the fact. It was a
reluctant recognition of reality. But as a former Chief Whip — and
how often in recent days had I wished that he still held that office —
he knew that support for me in the Cabinet had collapsed. David said
that he wanted me to win and would support me but could not
guarantee a victory. He left my room with tears in his eyes.
The last meeting was with Tony Newton who, though clearly
nervous, just about managed to get out the agreed line. He did not
think I could win, etc., etc. Nor, by now, did I. John Wakeham came in
again and elaborated further on what he had earlier told me. I had lost
the Cabinet’s support. I could not even muster a credible campaign
team. It was the end.

I was sick at heart. I could have resisted the opposition of opponents
and potential rivals and even respected them for it; but what grieved
me was the desertion of those I had always considered friends and
allies and the weasel words whereby they had transmuted their
betrayal into frank advice and concern for my fate. I dictated a brief
statement of my resignation to be read out at Cabinet the following
morning. But I said that I would return to No. 10 to talk to Denis
before finally taking my decision.
I was preparing to return when Norman Tebbit arrived with Michael
Portillo. Michael was Minister of State at the DoE with responsibility
for local government and the community charge. He was beyond any
questioning a passionate supporter of everything we stood for. He
tried to convince me that the Cabinet were misreading the situation,
that I was being misled and that with a vigorous campaign it would
still be possible to turn things round. With even a drop of this spirit in
higher places, it might indeed have been possible. But that was just
not there. Then another group of loyalists from the 92 Group of MPs
arrived in my room — George Gardiner, John Townend, Edward
Leigh, Chris Chope and a number of others. They had a similar
message to Michael. I was immensely grateful for their support and
warmth, and said that I would think about what to do. Then at last I
returned to No. 10.
RESIGNATION
I went up to see Denis on my return. There was not much to say, but
he comforted me. He had given me his own verdict earlier and it had
turned out to be right. After a few minutes I went down to the Cabinet
Room to start work on the speech I was to deliver in the following
day’s No Confidence debate. My Private Office had already prepared a
first draft, conceived under very different circumstances. Norman
Tebbit and — for some reason — John Gummer came in to help. It
was a mournful occasion. Every now and again I found I had to wipe
away a tear as the enormity of what had happened crowded in.
While we worked on into the night, Michael Portillo returned with
two other last-ditchers, Michael Forsyth and Michael Fallon. They
were not allowed to see me as I was engrossed in the speech. But when
I was told that they had been sent away, I said that I would naturally
see them, and they were summoned back. They arrived about
midnight and tried in vain to convince me that all was not lost.
Before I went to bed that night I stressed how important it was to
ensure that John Major’s own nomination papers were ready to be
submitted before the tight deadline if indeed I stood down. I said that I
would sleep on my own resignation, as I always did with important
matters, before making my final decision; but it would be very difficult
to prevail if the Cabinet did not have their hearts in the campaign.

At 7.30 the next morning — Thursday 22 November — I telephoned
down to Andrew Turnbull that I had finally resolved to resign. The
private office put into action the plan already agreed for an Audience
with the Queen. Peter Morrison telephoned Douglas Hurd and John
Major to inform them of my decision. John Wakeham and Ken Baker
were also told. I cleared the text of the press statement due to be
issued later in the morning, spent half an hour of rather desultory
briefing with Bernard, Charles and John for Questions in the House,
and then just before 9 o’clock, went down to chair my last Cabinet.
Normally, in the Cabinet anteroom ministers would be standing
around in groups, arguing and joking. On this occasion there was
silence. They stood with their backs against the wall looking in every
direction except mine. There was a short delay: John MacGregor had
been held up in the traffic. Then the Cabinet filed, still in silence, into
the Cabinet Room.
I said that I had a statement to make. Then I read it out:
Having consulted widely among my colleagues, I have concluded that the
unity of the Party and the prospects of victory in a general election would be
better served if I stood down to enable Cabinet colleagues to enter the ballot
for the leadership. I should like to thank all those in the Cabinet and outside
who have given me such dedicated support.

The Lord Chancellor then read out a statement of tribute to me,
which ministers agreed should be written into the Cabinet minutes.
Most of that day and the next few days, I felt as if I were sleepwalking
rather than experiencing and feeling everything that happened. Every
now and then, however, I would be overcome by the emotion of the
occasion and give way to tears. The Lord Chancellor’s reading of this
tribute was just such a difficult moment. When he had finished and I
had regained my composure, I said that it was vital that the Cabinet
should stand together to safeguard all that we believed in. That was
why I was standing down. The Cabinet should unite to back the person
most likely to beat Michael Heseltine. By standing down I had enabled
others to come forward who were not burdened by a legacy of
bitterness from ex-ministers who had been sacked. Party unity was
vital. Whether one, two or three colleagues stood, it was essential that
Cabinet should remain united and support their favourites in that
spirit.
Ken Baker on behalf of the Party and then Douglas Hurd as the
senior member of the Cabinet made their own short tributes. I could
bear no more of this, fearing I would lose my composure entirely, and
concluded the discussion with the hope that I would be able to offer
the new leader total and devoted support. There was then a tenminute break for courtesy calls to be made to the offices of the
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Liberal
Party (Jim Molyneaux of the Unionists could not be contacted) and a
statement was accordingly issued at 9.25 a.m.

The Cabinet meeting then resumed. It was almost business as usual.
This ranged from matters of the utmost triviality — an unsuccessful
Fisheries Council ruined by incompetent Italian chairmanship — to
matters of the greatest importance, the decision to increase our forces
in the Gulf by sending a second armoured brigade. Somehow I got
through it by concentrating on details, and the formal Cabinet ended
at about 10.15 a.m. But I invited ministers to stay on. It was a relief to
have more or less normal conversation on what was uppermost in our
minds, namely the likely outcome of the second ballot, over coffee.
After Cabinet I signed personal messages to Presidents Bush and
Gorbachev, European Community and G7 heads of government, and a
number of Gulf leaders. Douglas and John were by now busily
organizing their campaigns, both of them having decided to stand.
Later I worked on my speech for the afternoon debate. By this time I
was beginning to feel that a great weight had been lifted from me. A
No Confidence debate would have been a taxing ordeal if I had been
fighting on with so many of the Cabinet, junior ministers and backbenchers against me. Now that I had announced my departure,
however, I would again enjoy the united support of the Tory Party.
Now it would be roses, roses, all the way. And since this would be my
last major parliamentary performance as Prime Minister, I determined
to defend the achievements of the last eleven years in the same spirit
as I had fought for them.
After a brief Audience with the Queen I returned to No. 10 for
lunch. I had a quick drink with members of my staff in the study. I was
suddenly conscious that they too had their futures to think about, and
I found myself now and later comforting them almost as much as they
sought to comfort me. Crawfie had begun the packing. Joy was sorting
out outstanding constituency business. Denis was clearing his desk.
But I had more public duties to perform. I held my normal briefing
meeting for Questions and then left for the House at just before 2.30
p.m.
GRAND FINALE
No one will ever understand British politics who does not understand
the House of Commons. The House is not just another legislative body.
On special occasions it becomes in some almost mystical way the focus
of national feeling. As newspaper comments and the reflections of
those who were present will testify, I was not alone in sensing the
concentrated emotion of that afternoon. And it seemed as if this very
intensity, mingled with the feelings of relief that my great struggle
against mounting odds had ended, lent wings to my words. As I
answered Questions my confidence gradually rose.
Then I sat down to draw breath and listen to Neil Kinnock make his
opening speech in the No Confidence Debate. Mr Kinnock, in all his

years as Opposition leader, never let me down. Right to the end, he
struck every wrong note. On this occasion he delivered a speech that
might have served if I had announced my intention to stand for the
second ballot. It was a standard, partisan rant. One concession to the
generosity that the House feels on such occasions (and that his own
back-bencher, Dennis Skinner, no moderate and an old sparring
partner of mine, was about to express in a memorable intervention)
might have exploited the discomfiture that was palpably growing on
the Tory benches. It might have disarmed me and eroded the control
that was barely keeping my emotions in check. Instead, however, he
managed to fill me and the benches behind me with his own partisan
indignation and therefore intensified the newfound Tory unity — in
the circumstances a remarkable, if perverse, achievement.
The speech which I then rose to deliver does not read in Hansard as
a particularly eloquent one. It is a fighting defence of the
Government’s record which replies point by point to the Opposition’s
attack, and which owes more to the Conservative Research
Department than to Burke. For me at that moment, however, each
sentence was my testimony at the bar of History. It was as if I were
speaking for the last time, rather than merely for the last time as
Prime Minister. And that power of conviction came through and
impressed itself on the House.
After the usual partisan banter with Opposition hecklers, I restated
my convictions on Europe and reflected on the great changes which
had taken place in the world since I had entered No. 10. I said:
Ten years ago, the eastern part of Europe lay under totalitarian rule, its
people knowing neither rights nor liberties. Today, we have a Europe in
which democracy, the rule of law and basic human rights are spreading ever
more widely; where the threat to our security from the overwhelming
conventional forces of the Warsaw Pact has been removed; where the Berlin
Wall has been torn down and the Cold War is at an end.
These immense changes did not come about by chance. They have been
achieved by strength and resolution in defence, and by a refusal ever to be
intimidated. No one in eastern Europe believes that their countries would be
free had it not been for those western governments who were prepared to
defend liberty, and who kept alive their hope that one day eastern Europe
too would enjoy freedom.

My final reflection was on the Falklands and Gulf Wars, the second
of which we were just then gearing up to fight.
There is something else which one feels. That is a sense of this country’s
destiny: the centuries of history and experience which ensure that, when
principles have to be defended, when good has to be upheld and when evil
has to be overcome, Britain will take up arms. It is because we on this side
have never flinched from difficult decisions that this House and this country
can have confidence in this Government today.

Such was my defence of the record of the Government which I had
headed for eleven and a half years, which I had led to victory in three
elections, which had pioneered the new wave of economic freedom

that was transforming countries from eastern Europe to Australasia,
which had restored Britain’s reputation as a force to be reckoned with
in the world, and which at the very moment when our historic victory
in the Cold War was being ratified at the Paris conference had decided
to dispense with my services. I sat down with the cheers of my
colleagues, wets and dries, allies and opponents, stalwarts and
fainthearts, ringing in my ears, and began to think of what I would do
next.
BOWING OUT
But there was one more duty I had to perform, and that was to ensure
that John Major was my successor. I wanted — perhaps I needed — to
believe that he was the man to secure and safeguard my legacy and to
take our policies forward. So it was with disquiet that I learnt a
number of my friends were thinking of voting for Michael Heseltine.
They distrusted the role which John Major’s supporters like Richard
Ryder, Peter Lilley, Francis Maude and Norman Lamont had played in
my downfall. They also felt that Michael Heseltine, for all his faults,
was a heavyweight who could fill a room in the way a leader should. I
did all I could to argue them out of this, not only in personal
conversation but also at the lunch to which I invited my supporters on
Monday. In most cases I was successful.
Before then, however, I was to spend my last weekend at Chequers. I
arrived there on Saturday evening, travelling down after quite a jolly
little lunch with the family and friends at No. 10. On Sunday morning
Denis and I went to church, while Crawfie filled a Range Rover with
hats, books and a huge variety of personal odds and ends which were
to be delivered to our house in Dulwich. Gersons took away our larger
items. Denis and I entertained the Chequers staff for drinks before
lunch to say farewell and thank you for all their kindness over the
years. I had loved Chequers and I knew I would miss it. I decided that
I would like to walk round the rooms one last time and did so with
Denis as the light faded on that winter afternoon.
From the time that I had announced my resignation, the focus of
public interest naturally switched to the question of who would be my
successor. As I have said, I did all that I could to rally support for John
without publicly stating that I wanted him to win. From about this
time, however, I became conscious that there was a certain ambiguity
in his stance. On the one hand, he was understandably anxious to
attract my supporters. On the other, his campaign wanted to
emphasize that John was ‘his own man’. A joke — made in the context
of remarks on the Gulf — about my skills as a ‘back-seat driver’
provoked a flurry of anxiety in the Major camp. It was, unfortunately,
the shape of things to come.
However, I was truly delighted when the results came through —
John Major 185 votes, Michael Heseltine 131 and Douglas Hurd 56.

Officially, John was two votes short; but within minutes Douglas and
Michael had announced that they would support him in the third
ballot. He was effectively the new prime minister. I congratulated him
and joined in the celebrations at No. 11. But I did not stay long: this
was his night not mine.
Wednesday 28 November was my last day in office. The packing
was now all but complete. Early that morning I went down from the
flat to my study for the last time to check that nothing had been left
behind. It was a shock to find that I could not get in because the key
had already been taken off my key-ring. At 9.10 I came down to the
front hallway. (I was due shortly at the Palace for my final Audience
with the Queen.) As on the day of my arrival, all the staff of No. 10
were there. I shook hands with my private secretaries and others
whom I had come to know so well over the years. Some were in tears.
I tried to hold back mine but they flowed freely as I walked down the
hall past those applauding me on my way out of office, just as eleven
and a half years earlier they had greeted me as I entered it.
Before going outside and with Denis and Mark beside me, I paused
to collect my thoughts. Crawfie wiped a trace of mascara off my cheek,
evidence of a tear which I had been unable to check. The door opened
onto press and photographers. I went out to the bank of microphones
and read out a short statement which concluded:
Now it is time for a new chapter to open and I wish John Major all the luck
in the world. He will be splendidly served and he has the makings of a great
prime minister, which I am sure he will be in a very short time.

I waved and got into the car with Denis beside me, as he has always
been; and the car took us past press, policemen and the tall black gates
of Downing Street, away from red boxes and parliamentary questions,
summits and party conferences, budgets and communiqués, situation
rooms and scrambler telephones, out to whatever the future held.
*

See pp. 755–6.

**
*

See pp. 764–7.

See p. 757.

Chronology

1979
May 3

General election.

June-7

European elections.

June 12

1979 Budget. Standard rate of income tax cut to 30per

June 28

Tokyo G7 summit.

August 1–8

Lusaka CHOGM.

August 27

Assassination of Lord Mountbatten / Warrenpoint

October 23

Geoffrey Howe announced abolition of remaining

November
29–30

cent, top rate to 60 per cent.

bomb.

exchange controls.

Dublin European Council: budget arguments.

December 16

PM and Lord Carrington arrived in Washington for

December 25

Afghanistan: USSR began invasion.

two-day visit.

1980
January 2

Steel strike began. Ended 3 April.

May 5

SAS stormed Iranian Embassy.

June 2

Cabinet endorsed EC budget agreement.

June 22

Venice G7 summit.

September
22

Iran-Iraq War began.

October 10

PM addressed Conservative Conference, Brighton: ‘The

October 27

First Maze hunger strike began. Ended 18 December.

lady’s not for turning.’

November 4 USA: Ronald Reagan elected President.
December 8 Anglo-Irish summit in Dublin.

1981
January 5 Norman St John Stevas and Angus Maude left the

Government. Francis Pym became Leader of House of
Commons, John Nott to Defence, Leon Brittan joined
Cabinet as Chief Secretary.

February

NCB announced pit closures. Government announced

March 1

Second IRA hunger strike begun by Bobby Sands. Ended 3

March 10

1981 Budget.

March 26

SDP formed. Alliance formed on 16 June.

March 30

364 economists’ letter criticizing economic policy.

10

April 11–
14

NCB plan withdrawn on 18 February.

October after 10 deaths; then Chelsea Barracks bomb.

Brixton riots.

May 10

François Mitterrand elected French President.

July 3

Southall riot. Toxteth and Moss Side riots 4–8 July.

July 20

Ottawa G7 summit opened.

July 23

Argument at public spending cabinet.

September Reshuffle: Ian Gilmour, Mark Carlisle and Lord Soames
14

left the Government. Nigel Lawson, Norman Tebbit and

Cecil Parkinson joined the Cabinet. Jim Prior appointed

to Northern Ireland.
September
30

December
13

Melbourne CHOGM opened.
Poland: Martial law declared.

1982
March 25

Roy Jenkins won Glasgow, Hillhead by-election.

April 2

Argentina invaded Falkland Islands.

April 3

Saturday Commons debate on Falklands. Passage of UN

April 5

First naval units left Portsmouth. Lord Carrington and

SCR502.

other Foreign Office ministers resigned. Francis Pym
became Foreign Secretary, John Biffen Leader HC.

April 25

South Georgia recaptured.

May 2

General Belgrano sunk by HMS Conqueror.

May 4

HMS Sheffield hit by an Exocet.

May 21

British troops landed at San Carlos.

June 5

Versailles G7 summit opened.

June 14

Capture of Port Stanley. Argentinian surrender.

July 20

Hyde Park, then Regent’s Park bombs.

July 26

St Paul’s Thanksgiving Service.

September West Germany: fall of Helmut Schmidt’s Government.
17

September
20

1983

Helmut Kohl succeeded him as Chancellor.

PM began visit to Japan/China/Hong Kong.

January 6 Reshuffle: John Nott resigned. Michael Heseltine to
Defence; Tom King to Environment.

March 23

USA: President Reagan announced SDI.

May 28

Williamsburg G7 summit opened.

June g

General election.

June 11

New Government formed: Nigel Lawson Chancellor; Leon
Brittan Home Secretary; Geoffrey Howe Foreign
Secretary; Francis Pym dropped.

October 14 Cecil Parkinson resigned.
October 25 US invasion of Grenada.
November
14

December
4

December
17

Cruise missiles arrived at Greenham.
Athens European Council.
Harrods bomb.

1984
February 9

USSR: death of Andropov. PM attended funeral.

March 8

Miners’ strike began.

June 25

Fontainebleau European Council: budget settlement.

July 10

National dock strike (ended 20 July).

August 24

Second national dock strike (ended 18 September).

October 12

Brighton bomb.

October 25

High Court ordered sequestration of NUM.

October 31

India: Mrs Gandhi assassinated.

November 6

USA: President Reagan re-elected.

November 20 British Telecom flotation.

December 75 Mr and Mrs Gorbachev visited Chequers.
December 19 China: PM signed Hong Kong agreement in Peking.

1985
February

PM visited Washington and addressed a joint session of

March 5

Miners returned to work.

March 11

USSR: Mr Gorbachev new Soviet leader. PM visited

April 4

PM began eleven-day tour of Far East.

May 2

Bonn G7 summit opened.

September

Reshuffle. Peter Rees, Patrick Jenkin and Lord Gowrie

20

2

Congress.

Moscow for Chernenko’s funeral.

left the Government. Norman Tebbit new party

chairman. Leon Brittan to DTI. Douglas Hurd to Home
Office. Kenneth Clarke, John MacGregor and Kenneth
Baker all joined the Cabinet.

September
9

September
16–19

September
25

October 6–
7

October
16–23

Handsworth riots (continued 10 September). Brixton 28
September.

PM toured Egypt and Jordan.
Plaza Accord to reduce value of the dollar.
Broadwater Farm riot.
Nassau CHOGM: arguments about South Africa.

October 24 PM and President Reagan addressed UN
GeneralAssembly.

November

PM signed Anglo-Irish Agreement at Hillsborough.

15
December
3

Luxemburg European Council.

1986
January 9

Westland: Michael Heseltine resigned.

January 24

Westland: Leon Brittan resigned.

January 28

Publication of Community Charge Green Paper.

April 15

US raid on Libya.

May 3–6

PM visited South Korea and attended Tokyo

May 21

Reshuffle. Keith Joseph resigned. Kenneth

May 24–27

PM visited Israel.

August 3

Special London Commonwealth summit on

October 24

Britain broke off diplomatic relations with

November
13–16

December 5

G7summit.

Bakerreplaced him as Education Secretary.

SouthAfrica.

Syriafollowing Hindawi affair.

PM visited Camp David, following Reykjaviksummit.
London European Council.

1987
February
22

Louvre Accord to stabilize the dollar.

March 28

USSR: PM began five-day tour of USSR (ended2 April).

June 8

Venice G7 summit opened.

June 11

General election.

July 17

USA: PM visited President Reagan in Washington.

October 6

Conservative Conference: led to abandonment of decision

October
13

October
19

November
8

December
7

December
8

to phase in community charge (dualrunning).
Vancouver CHOGM.
‘Black Monday’.
Enniskillen bomb killed 11, injured 60.

PM held talks with Mr Gorbachev at Brize Norton.
INF Treaty signed in Washington.

1988
January 4–
8

PM toured Africa.

January 10 Lord Whitelaw resigned due to ill-health.
March 7

Sterling ‘uncapped’.

March 15

1988 Budget. Standard rate of income tax cut to 25per

March

NATO summit in Brussels.

April 6–8

PM visited Turkey.

April 18

Michael Mates’s amendment to band community charge

May 21

PM spoke to General Assembly of Church of Scotland.

June 2

Interest rates increased from low of 7.5 per cent to 8 per

cent, top rate to 40 per cent.

defeated.

cent.

June 19–21 Toronto G7 summit.

July 17

Alan Walters’s return as economic adviser to PM

July 25

Reshuffle. DHSS split between Kenneth Clarke and John

July 30

PM began eleven-day tour of the Far East and Australia.

August 20

IRA bomb at Ballygawley, Co. Tyrone. PM cut short

September
20

announced.
Moore.

Cornish holiday.
Bruges speech.

November 2 PM began three-day visit to Poland.
November 8 USA: George Bush elected President.
November
17

December
21

PM visited Washington: farewell to President Reagan
and talks with President Bush.
Lockerbie bombing.

1989
January 31 Publication of NHS White Paper.
March 27

PM began six-day visit to Africa.

April 1

PM visited Namibia.

April 5

Mr Gorbachev began a three-day visit to UK.

May 29–30 NATO fortieth anniversary summit in Brussels.
June 3

China: Tiananmen Square; massacre.

June 26

Madrid European Council.

July 14–16 French Revolution Bicentennial and Paris G7summit.

July 24

Reshuffle: John Moore, Paul Channon, Lord Youngand
George Younger left the Government. Geoffrey Howe

from FCO to Lord President and Leader HC. John Major
succeeded him at FCO.
September
19–22

October
18–24

PM visited Japan.
Kuala Lumpur CHOGM.

October 26 Nigel Lawson resigned. John Major replaced himas

Chancellor and Douglas Hurd became ForeignSecretary.

November
9

East Germany: announced opening of its border with
West Germany. Demolition of Berlin Wallbegan 10
November.

December 5 PM defeated Sir Anthony Meyer in leadershipelection
314:33. Twenty-seven abstained.

December
10

December
22

Czechoslovakia: end of communist rule.
Romania: Ceauşescu overthrown.

1990
February 2

South Africa: President de Klerk announcedunbanning

March 31

Trafalgar Square riot.

of ANC. Nelson Mandela released February 11.

April 24–25 PM visited Turkey on seventy-fifth anniversary of
Gallipoli landings.

July 6

NATO summit in London.

July 9

Houston G7 summit.

July 14

Nick Ridley resigned.

July 30

IRA murdered Ian Gow.

August 2

Gulf: Iraq invaded Kuwait. PM held talks in Aspen,

September
17–19

October 3
October 27–
28

November 1
November
19–21

Colorado with President Bush.

PM visited Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
German reunification.
Rome European Council.
Geoffrey Howe resigned.
CSCE summit in Paris.

November

Conservative leadership first ballot: MT 204, Heseltine

November

PM announced decision not to contest secondballot.

20
22

November
28

152, 16 abstentions.

Final speech to the Commons as PM.
MT resigned as PM.

The Cabinet and other important offices

Names marked with an asterisk denote ministers changing jobs or
entering the Cabinet for the first time at the beginning of the defined
period.
Names in italics denote ministers who left the Government at the end
of the defined period.
Names in bold denote Cabinet members. Others in roman.

May 1979–January

January – September

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

HOWE

HOWE

Chief Secretary

BIFFEN

*

Foreign Secretary

CARRINGTON

CARRINGTON

Home Secretary

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

STEVAS

*

Leader H/Lords

SOAMES

SOAMES

Ld Chllr

HAILSHAM

HAILSHAM

Ld President

SOAMES

SOAMES

Ld Privy Seal

GILMOUR

GILMOUR

Chllr of the Duchy

STEVAS

*

Agriculture

WALKER

WALKER

Defence

PYM

*

Education

CARLISLE

CARLISLE

Employment

PRIOR

PRIOR

Energy

HOWELL

HOWELL

Environment

HESELTINE

HESELTINE

JENKIN

JENKIN

List of Offices

Leader

H/Commons

1981

1981

BRITTAN

PYM

PYM

NOTT

DHSS
Industry

JOSEPH

JOSEPH

Northern Ireland

ATKINS

ATKINS

Paymaster-General

MAUDE

*

Scotland

YOUNGER

YOUNGER

Trade

NOTT

*

Transport

(non-cabinet)

*

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

EDWARDS

EDWARDS

Attorney-General

HAVERS

HAVERS

SOLICITOR-GENERAL

PERCIVAL

PERCIVAL

CHMN PARTY

THORNEYCROFT

THORNEYCROFT

CHIEF WHIP

JOPLING

JOPLING

CHMN 1922 CTTEE

DU CANN

DU CANN

PYM

BIFFEN
FOWLER

September 1981 – April

April 1982 – January

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

HOWE

HOWE

Chief Secretary

BRITTAN

BRITTAN

Foreign Secretary

CARRINGTON

*

Home Secretary

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

PYM

*

Leader H/Lords

LADY YOUNG

LADY YOUNG

Ld Chllr

HAILSHAM

HAILSHAM

Ld President

*

*

BIFFEN

Ld Privy Seal

*

*

LADY YOUNG

Chllr of the Duchy

*

*

PARKINSON

Agriculture

WALKER

WALKER

Defence

NOTT

NOTT

Education

*

JOSEPH

1982

Leader

H/Commons

PYM
ATKINS
PYM

JOSEPH

1983

PYM

BIFFEN

Employment

*

TEBBIT

Energy

*

LAWSON

Environment

HESELTINE

HESELTINE

DHSS

*

FOWLER

Industry

*

JENKIN

Northern Ireland

*

PRIOR

Paymaster-General

*

PARKINSON

Scotland

YOUNGER

YOUNGER

Trade

*

*

Transport

HOWELL

HOWELL

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

EDWARDS

EDWARDS

Attorney-General

HAVERS

HAVERS

Solicitor-General

PERCIVAL

PERCIVAL

Chmn Party

*

PARKINSON

Ch Whip

JOPLING

JOPLING

Chmn 1922 Cttee

DU CANN

DU CANN

TEBBIT
LAWSON

FOWLER
JENKIN
PRIOR
PARKINSON

BIFFEN

PARKINSON

COCKFIELD

January – June 1983

June – October 1983

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

HOWE

*

Chief Secretary

BRITTAN

*

Foreign Secretary

PYM

*

Home Secretary

WHITELAW

*

Leader H/Commons

BIFFEN

BIFFEN

Leader H/Lords

LADY YOUNG

*

Ld Chllr

HAILSHAM

HAILSHAM

Ld President

BIFFEN

*

Ld Privy Seal

LADY YOUNG

*

Chllr of the Duchy

PARKINSON

*

LAWSON
REES
HOWE
BRITTAN

WHITELAW

WHITELAW
BIFFEN
COCKFIELD

Agriculture

WALKER

*

Defence

*

HESELTINE

Education

JOSEPH

JOSEPH

Employment

TEBBIT

TEBBIT

Energy

LAWSON

*

Environment

HESELTINE

*

DHSS

FOWLER

FOWLER

Industry/DTI

JENKIN

*

Northern Ireland

PRIOR

PRIOR

Paymaster-General

PARKINSON

VACANT

Scotland

YOUNGER

YOUNGER

Trade

COCKFIELD

SEE DTI

Transport

HOWELL

*

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

EDWARDS

EDWARDS

Attorney-General

HAVERS

HAVERS

Solicitor-General

PERCIVAL

PERCIVAL

Chmn Party

PARKINSON

PARKINSON/GUMMER

ChWhip

JOPLING

WAKEHAM

Chmn 1922 Cttee

DU CANN

DU CANN

JOPLING

HESELTINE

WALKER
KING

PARKINSON

RIDLEY

October 1983 –

September 1984 –

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

LAWSON

LAWSON

Chief Secretary

REES

REES

Foreign Secretary

HOWE

HOWE

Home Secretary

BRITTAN

BRITTAN

BIFFEN

BIFFEN

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

September 1984

Leader

H/Commons

September 1985

Leader H/Lords
Ld Chllr

HAILSHAM

HAILSHAM

Ld President

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

Ld Privy Seal

BIFFEN

BIFFEN

COCKFIELD

*

Agriculture

JOPLING

JOPLING

Defence

HESELTINE

HESELTINE

Education

JOSEPH

JOSEPH

Employment

*

KING

Energy

WALKER

WALKER

Environment

*

JENKIN

JENKIN

DHSS

FOWLER

FOWLER

DTI

*

TEBBIT

Northern Ireland

PRIOR

*

VACANT

GUMMER (NON-CABINET)

Scotland

YOUNGER

YOUNGER

Transport

RIDLEY

RIDLEY

Without portfolio

-

*

Wales

EDWARDS

EDWARDS

Attorney-General

HAVERS

HAVERS

Solicitor-General

*

MAYHEW

Chmn Party

GUMMER

GUMMER

Ch Whip

WAKEHAM

WAKEHAM

Chmn 1922 Cttee

DU CANN

ONSLOW

Chllr of the
Duchy

PaymasterGeneral

KING

TEBBIT

GOWRIE

HURD

YOUNG

MAYHEW

September 1985 – January

January 1986 – May

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

LAWSON

LAWSON

1986

1986

Chief Secretary

*

Foreign Secretary

HOWE

HOWE

Home Secretary

*

HURD

HURD

BIFFEN

BIFFEN

Leader H/Lords

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

Ld Chllr

HAILSHAM

HAILSHAM

Ld President

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

Ld Privy Seal

BIFFEN

BIFFEN

Chllr of the Duchy

TEBBIT

TEBBIT

Agriculture

JOPLING

JOPLING

Defence

HESELTINE

YOUNGER

Education

JOSEPH

JOSEPH

Employment

*

YOUNG

YOUNG

Energy

WALKER

WALKER

Environment

*

BAKER

DHSS

FOWLER

FOWLER

Industry/DTI

*

BRITTAN

*

Northern Ireland

*

KING

KING

Leader

H/Commons

MACGREGOR

BAKER

MACGREGOR

CHANNON

Paymaster-General *CLARKE

CLARKE

Scotland

*

*

Transport

RIDLEY

RIDLEY

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

EDWARDS

EDWARDS

Attorney-General

HAVERS

HAVERS

Solicitor-General

MAYHEW

MAYHEW

Chmn Party

TEBBIT

TEBBIT

Chief Whip

WAKEHAM

WAKEHAM

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

ONSLOW

YOUNGER

RIFKIND

May 1986—June 1987 June 1987 – October 1987
PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

LAWSON

LAWSON

Chief Secretary

MACGREGOR

*

Foreign Secretary

HOWE

HOWE

Home Secretary

HURD

HURD

Leader H/Commons

BIFFEN

*

Leader H/Lords

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

Ld Chllr

HAILSHAM

*

Ld President

WHITELAW

WHITELAW

Ld Privy Seal

BIFFEN

*

Chllr of the Duchy

TEBBIT

*

Agriculture

JOPLING

*

Defence

YOUNGER

YOUNGER

Education

*

BAKER

Employment

YOUNG

*

Energy

WALKER

*

Environment

*

RIDLEY

DHSS

FOWLER

*

Industry/DTI

CHANNON

*

Northern Ireland

KING

KING

Paymaster-General

CLARKE

*

Scotland

RIFKIND

RIFKIND

Transport

*

*

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

EDWARDS

*

Attorney-General

MAYHEW

MAYHEW

Solicitor-General

LYELL

LYELL

Chmn Party

TEBBIT

BROOKE

Chief Whip

WAKEHAM

WADDINGTON

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

ONSLOW

BAKER

RIDLEY

MOORE

MAJOR

WAKEHAM

HAVERS

WAKEHAM
CLARKE
MACGREGOR

FOWLER
PARKINSON

MOORE
YOUNG

BROOKE (non-cabinet)

CHANNON

WALKER

October 1987 – January

January — July

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

LAWSON

LAWSON

Chief Secretary

MAJOR

MAJOR

Foreign Secretary

HOWE

HOWE

Home Secretary

HURD

HURD

WAKEHAM

WAKEHAM

Leader H/Lords

WHITELAW

*

Ld Chllr

*

MACKAY

Ld President

WHITELAW

*

Ld Privy Seal

WAKEHAM

*

Chllr of the Duchy

CLARKE

CLARKE

Agriculture

MACGREGOR

MACGREGOR

Defence

YOUNGER

YOUNGER

Education

BAKER

BAKER

Employment

FOWLER

FOWLER

Energy

PARKINSON

PARKINSON

Environment

RIDLEY

RIDLEY

DHSS

MOORE

MOORE

Industry/DTI

YOUNG

YOUNG

Northern Ireland

KING

KING

Paymaster-General

BROOKE(NON-CABINET)

BROOKE

Scotland

RIFKIND

RIFKIND

Transport

CHANNON

CHANNON

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

WALKER

WALKER

Attorney-General

MAYHEW

MAYHEW

LYELL

LYELL

1988

Leader

H/Commons

MACKAY

1988

BELSTEAD

WAKEHAM
BELSTEAD

Solicitor-General
Chmn Party

BROOKE

BROOKE

Chief Whip

WADDINGTON

WADDINGTON

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

ONSLOW

July 1988 – July 1989

July — October 1989

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

LAWSON

LAWSON

Chief Secretary

MAJOR

*

Foreign Secretary

HOWE

MAJOR

Home Secretary

HURD

HURD

Leader H/Commons

WAKEHAM

*

Leader H/Lords

BELSTEAD

BELSTEAD

Ld Chllr

MACKAY

MACKAY

Ld President

WAKEHAM

*

Ld Privy Seal

BELSTEAD

BELSTEAD

Chllr of the Duchy

*

*

BAKER

Agriculture

MACGREGOR

*

GUMMER

Defence

YOUNGER

*

KING

Education

BAKER

*

MACGREGOR

Employment

FOWLER

FOWLER

Energy

PARKINSON

*

WAKEHAM

Environment

RIDLEY

*

PATTEN

DSS

MOORE

*

NEWTON

DH

*

CLARKE

DTI

YOUNG

*

RIDLEY

Northern Ireland

KING

*

BROOKE

Paymaster-General

BROOKE

*

CAITHNESS

Scotland

RIFKIND

RIFKIND

Transport

CHANNON

*

NEWTON

CLARKE

(non-cabinet)

LAMONT

HOWE

HOWE

PARKINSON

Without portfolio

-

-

Wales

WALKER

WALKER

Attorney-General

MAYHEW

MAYHEW

Solicitor-General

LYELL

LYELL

Chmn Party

BROOKE

*

Chief Whip

*

WADDINGTON

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

WADDINGTON

BAKER

ONSLOW

October 1989-January

January 1990-May

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

*MAJOR

MAJOR

Chief Secretary

LAMONT

LAMONT

Foreign Secretary

*HURD

HURD

Home Secretary

*WADDINGTON

WADDINGTON

HOWE

HOWE

Leader H/Lords

BELSTEAD

BELSTEAD

Ld Chllr

MACKAY

MACKAY

Ld President

HOWE

HOWE

Ld Privy Seal

BELSTEAD

BELSTEAD

Chllr of the Duchy

BAKER

BAKER

Agriculture

GUMMER

GUMMER

Defence

KING

KING

Education

MACGREGOR

MACGREGOR

Employment

FOWLER

*

Energy

WAKEHAM

WAKEHAM

Environment

PATTEN

PATTEN

DSS

NEWTON

NEWTON

DH

CLARKE

CLARKE

RIDLEY

RIDLEY

1990

Leader

H/Commons

1990

HOWARD

Industry/DTI
Northern Ireland

BROOKE

BROOKE

Paymaster-General

*

RYDER

Scotland

RIFKIND

RIFKIND

Transport

PARKINSON

PARKINSON

Without portfolio

–

–

Wales

WALKER

WALKER

Attorney-General

MAYHEW

MAYHEW

Solicitor-General

LYELL

LYELL

Chmn Party

BROOKE

*

Chief Whip

*RENTON

RENTON

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

ONSLOW

RYDER

BAKER

May — July 1990

July — November 1990

PM

MRS THATCHER

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

MAJOR

MAJOR

Chief Secretary

LAMONT

LAMONT

Foreign Secretary

HURD

HURD

Home Secretary

WADDINGTON

WADDINGTON

Leader H/Commons

HOWE

HOWE

Leader H/Lords

BELSTEAD

BELSTEAD

Ld Chllr

MACKAY

MACKAY

Ld President

HOWE

HOWE

Ld Privy Seal

BELSTEAD

BELSTEAD

Chllr of the Duchy

BAKER

BAKER

Agriculture

GUMMER

GUMMER

Defence

KING

KING

Education

MACGREGOR

MACGREGOR

Employment

HOWARD

HOWARD

Energy

WAKEHAM

WAKEHAM

Environment

PATTEN

PATTEN

DSS

NEWTON

NEWTON

DH

CLARKE

CLARKE

Industry/DTI

RIDLEY

*

Northern Ireland

BROOKE

BROOKE

Paymaster-General

RYDER

RYDER

Scotland

RIFKIND

RIFKIND

Transport

PARKINSON

PARKINSON

Without portfolio

–

–

Wales

*

HUNT

Attorney-General

MAYHEW

MAYHEW

Solicitor-General

LYELL

LYELL

Chmn Party

BAKER

BAKER

Chief Whip

WADDINGTON

WADDINGTON

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

ONSLOW

HUNT

LILLEY

November 1990
PM

MRS THATCHER

Chllr Exchequer

MAJOR

Chief Secretary

LAMONT

Foreign Secretary

HURD

Home Secretary

WADDINGTON

Leader H/Commons

*

Leader H/Lords

BELSTEAD

Ld Chllr

MACKAY

Ld President

*

Ld Privy Seal

BELSTEAD

Chllr of the Duchy

BAKER

Agriculture

GUMMER

Defence

KING

MACGREGOR

MACGREGOR

Education

*

Employment

HOWARD

Energy

WAKEHAM

Environment

PATTEN

DSS

NEWTON

DH

*

Industry/DTI

LILLEY

Northern Ireland

BROOKE

Paymaster-General

RYDER

Scotland

RIFKIND

Transport

PARKINSON

Without portfolio

–

Wales

HUNT

Attorney-General

MAYHEW

Solicitor-General

LYELL

Chmn Party

BAKER

Chief Whip

RENTON

Chmn 1922 Cttee

ONSLOW

CLARKE

WALDEGRAVE

List of Abbreviations

ABM

Anti-Ballistic Missile

ACAS

Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service

AGR

Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor

ALCM

Air-launched Cruise Missile

ANC

African National Congress

AUEW

Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers

BL

British Leyland (later Rover Group)

BMA

British Medical Association

BMD

Ballistic Missile Defence

BR

British Rail

BSC

British Steel Corporation

CAP

Common Agricultural Policy

CBI

Confederation of British Industry

CDU

German Christian Democrat Party

CEGB

Central Electricity Generating Board

CFCs

Chlorofluorocarbons

CFE

Conventional Forces in Europe

CHOGM

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting

CND

Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament

CPRS

Central Policy Review Staff

CPS

Centre for Policy Studies

CSCE

Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe

DES

Department of Education and Science

DHA

District Health Authority

DHSS

Department of Health and Social Security(divided from
1988)

DoE

Department of the Environment

DTI

Department of Trade and Industry

DUP

Democratic Unionist Party

E

Economic Committee of the Cabinet

E(A)

Principal sub-committee of E

EBRD

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

EC

European Community

ECJ

European Court of Justice

ECOFIN

Economic and Financial Affairs Council of the EC

ECST

European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism

Ecu

European Currency Unit

EDG

European Democratic Group

EDU

European Democratic Union

EFL

External Financing Limit

EFTA

European Free Trade Association

EMS

European Monetary System

EMU

Economic and Monetary Union

EPG

Eminent Persons Group (sent to South Africa)

ERM

Exchange Rate Mechanism (of the EMS)

EXCO

Executive Council (Hong Kong)

FCO

Foreign and Commonwealth Office

FRG

Federal Republic of Germany

FSBR

Financial Statement and Budget Report (‘the Red Book’)

G7

Group of Seven

GATT

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GLC

Greater London Council

GLCM

Ground-launched Cruise Missile

GM

General Motors

GM

school

Grant-Maintained school

GNP

Gross National Product

GP

General Practitioner

H

Home Affairs Committee of the Cabinet

HAT

Housing Action Trust

HMI

Her Majesty’s Inspectorate (of schools)

IDU

International Democratic Union

IEA

Institute of Economic Affairs

IGC

Inter-Governmental Conference

ILEA

Inner London Education Authority

IMF

International Monetary Fund

INF

Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces

INLA

Irish National Liberation Army

IRA

Irish Republican Army

ISTC

Iron and Steel Trades Confederation

ITC

Independent Television Commission

L

Legislation Committee of the Cabinet

LEA

Local Education Authority

MCAs

Monetary compensation amounts

MEZ

Maritime Exclusion Zone

MIRVs

Multiple independently targettable re-entry vehicles

MLR

Minimum Lending Rate

MNF

Multi-National Force

MoD

Ministry of Defence

MSC

Manpower Services Commission

MTFS

Medium Term Financial Strategy

MO

Monetary base

£M3

Sterling M3

NACODS

National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputiesand
Shotfirers

NADs

National Armaments Directors

NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NCB

National Coal Board (later British Coal)

NCC

National Curriculum Council

NDLS

National Dock Labour Scheme

NEB

National Enterprise Board

NEDC

National Economic Development Council (‘Neddy’)

NGA

National Graphical Association

NHS

National Health Service

NICs

National Insurance contributions

NIO

Northern Ireland Office

NIS

National Insurance Surcharge

NRC

National Reporting Centre

NUM

National Union of Mineworkers

OAS

Organization of American States

OD

Overseas and Defence Committee of the Cabinet

OD(SA)

Sub-Committee of OD which ran the Falklands War

ODA

Overseas Development Administration

OECD

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development

OECS

Organization of Eastern Caribbean States

OPEC

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries

OUP

Official Unionist Party

PLO

Palestine Liberation Organization

PPS

Parliamentary Private Secretary

PSBR

Public Sector Borrowing Requirement

PSDR

Public Sector Debt Repayment

QL

Queen’s Speeches and Future Legislation Committeeof the
Cabinet

QUANGO Quasi-autonomous non-governmental organization
RHA

Regional Health Authority

RPI

Retail Price Index

RUC

Royal Ulster Constabulary

SALT

Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty

SAS

Special Air Service

SDLP

Social Democratic and Labour Party

SDP

Social Democratic Party

SDI

Strategic Defence Initiative

SLCM

Sea-launched Cruise Missile

SNF

Short-range Nuclear Forces

SSA

Standard Spending Assessment

START

Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty

SWAPO

South West Africa People’s Organization

TASM

Tactical Air-to-Surface Missile

TEZ

Total Exclusion Zone

TGWU

Transport and General Workers’ Union

TSRB

Top Salaries Review Board

TUC

Trades Union Congress

UAE

United Arab Emirates

UDM

Union of Democratic Miners

UDR

Ulster Defence Regiment

UNSCR

United Nations Security Council Resolution

VAT

Value Added Tax

WEU

Western European Union

Index
The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition
from which it was created. To locate a specific passage, please use the
search feature of your e-book reader.
Government Departments and Ministries are grouped together
under the heading Departments and Ministries
NOTE:

Abdul Rahman, Tunku, 502–3
ABM treaty (1972), 465, 467, 471, 473
Abrahamson, General James, 476
Abu Dhabi, MT’s visit (1981), 163
Abu Nidal, 442
Acland, Sir Antony (Permanent Under Secretary of State FCO 198186, British Ambassador to Washington 1986–91), 192, 214, 817
‘Action for Jobs’ programme, 421
Adams, Gerry, 408
Adefope, Major-General H.E.O., 76
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS), 113, 367–8
Aerospatiale, 428
Afghanistan: Soviet invasion, 65, 69, 87–8, 91, 160, 478; refugees,
167–8; Soviet withdrawal, 772, 773, 774
Africa, MT’s visits, 523, 524–9
African National Congress (ANC), 519, 520, 531–2, 533–4
Agriculture Council, see EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
Agriculture Policy Group, 565
Agusta, 428, 429
Ahtisaari, Martti, 528, 529
Albakin, Leonid, 802
Aldermaston Atomic Weapons Establishment, 716
Alexandra, Princess, 331
Alison, Michael, 380, 382
Alliance: opinion polls (1981–2), 264, 265; policies, 265; ‘Falklands
factor’, 265–6; by-election gains (1982–3), 266; election
campaign (1983) 287, 291, 303–4; gains (1985), 416; leadership,

573; policies, 573; assault on (1987), 574, 577; manifesto
(1987), 576; election campaign (1987), 578, 581
Alliance Party (Northern Ireland), 387
Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (AUEW), 116, 117
American Economist, 715
Amersham International, 678
Amin, Hafizullah, 87
Anaya, Admiral Jorge, 176
Ancram, Michael, 647
Andreotti, Giulio (Italian Prime Minister 1972–73, 1976–79, 1989–
92), 70, 549–51, 762, 765, 766
Andrew, Prince, 181
Andrew, Sir Robert, 399
Andropov, Yuri (Soviet President 1082–84), 321, 450, 453, 455–6,
458, 469
Anglo-Irish Agreement, 385, 402–6, 410, 413, 415, 421
Anglo-Irish Inter-Governmental Council, 393
Anguilla, ‘invasion’, 8
Annenberg, Walter, 36
Antall, Jozsef (Prime Minister of Hungary 1990–), 809
Antelope, HMS, 226
Anti-Ballistic Missiles (ABM), 464–5
anti-satellite (ASAT) capability, 462
Antrim, HMS, 205, 330
Arab-Israeli dispute, 322, 487, 507–12, 526, 827
Arab League, 816
Archer, Jeffrey, 422
Ardent, HMS, 225
Argentina: Falklands policy, 174–6; Falklands invasion, 177, 187;
US relations, 176–7, 179–80, 188, 323; embargo, 190–1, 223;
Haig negotiations, 193–200, 202–4, 206–8, 210–11, 217, 222,
224, 229–30; Belgrano sinking, 214–16, 217; Falklands
engagement, 225–35; Falklands surrender, 235
Argonaut, HMS, 225
Armed Forces Pay Review Body, 32
Armenia, MT’s visit (1990), 807

Armilla Patrol, 91, 164, 506, 816
arms sales, 163
Armstrong, Sir Robert (Cabinet Secretary 1979–87 and Head Home
Civil Service 1981–87), 395, 396, 398
arts, 632–4
Arts Council, 633
Ascension Island, 187, 200, 201, 202, 208, 213
Aspen, Colorado: MT’s speech (1990), 800, 819–20; MT-Bush
Kuwait talks, 816–20
Assisted Places Scheme, 39
Associated British Ports, 678
Astiz, Captain, 208
A-Team, see Strategy Group
Atkins, Humphrey (Northern Ireland Secretary 1979–81, Lord Privy
Seal 1981–82), 151, 179, 186, 387, 394
Atlantic Conveyor, 227–8
Attali, Jacques, 734, 759
Attlee, Clement (Labour Prime Minister 1945–51), 5
Audit Commission, 616, 643n
Austin, General Hudson, 328
Austin Rover, 438, 439, 440
Australia: MT’s visit (1988), 410- 11, 504, 505–6; role, 501–2
Autocue, 258, 286, 382, 468, 568
Autumn Statement (1982), 271
Aviation Weekly, 464
Babangida, General Ibrahim (President Nigeria 1985-), 524, 525,
526
Bagehot, Walter, 446–7
Baker, James (US Secretary of State 1989–92) MT’s meeting (1988),
782; European policies, 783, 795; NATO, 785, 788, 811; Gulf
War build-up, 820–1, 826, 828
Baker, Kenneth (Education Secretary 1986–89, Conservative Party
Chairman 1989–90): Industry, 131; IT, 271; Environment, 420;
local authority propaganda battle, 562; community charge, 563,
647, 650–1, 652, 656, 657, 658; Education, 563, 589, 651;
‘opted-out’ schools, 578; election campaign (1987), 578, 580;

national curriculum, 593–7; teacher training, 598; Party
Chairman, 656, 714, 756, 758, 836; suitability as successor to
MT, 755; Gorbachev meeting, 773; Howe’s resignation, 835; byelection results discussion, 838; leadership election campaign
(1990), 841, 846–7, 849, 851, 853–4; MT’s resignation, 856, 857
balance of payments deficit (1988–9), 706
Balfour, Arthur (Conservative Prime Minister 1902–5), 5
Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD), 464–5, 467
ballots, trade union, 99, 274, 276, 284, 572, 669
Ballygawley bomb (1988), 411
Baltic States, 767, 801
Bancroft, Sir Ian (Permanent Secretary Civil Service Department and
Head Home Civil Service 1978–81), 47–8
Banda, Dr Hastings (President of Malawi 1966-), 527–8
Bank of England: ‘corset’, 125; Polish crisis, 254; Westland, 426;
Hong Kong currency, 489–90; ERM question, 691, 695; exchange
rate intervention, 702; Lawson’s proposals, 706–7
bankruptcies, 52
Barnett, Joel, Lord, 637
Basnett, David, 372
BBC: pay levels, 102; Falklands reporting, 181, 214; unilateralism,
267; Milltown Cemetery film, 408; election results forecast
(1987), 588; licence fee, 634–7; advertising question, 636;
independent producers, 636, 638
Begin, Menachem (Israeli Prime Minister 1977–83), 510n
Begun, Iosif, 484
Beirut bombings (1983), 327–8
Belgium, cruise missiles, 241, 243
Belgrano, see General Belgrano
Belize, British presence, 248
Bell, Tim: election campaign (1983), 287–8; miners’ strike (1984–
5), 354; election campaign (1987), 570, 585; community charge
discussions, 658; leadership election campaign (1990), 841
Belstead, Lord, 851
benefits, see social security benefits
Berlin disco bomb (1986), 443
Berlin Wall, 263, 759, 789, 793
Berrill, Sir Kenneth, 30

Berry, Sir Anthony, 381
Beswick, Lord, 108
Biffen, John (Chief Secretary 1979–81, Trade Secretary 1981–82,
Leader HC 1982–87): Chief Secretary to Treasury, 26; public
spending cuts, 50; BL, 117; MTFS attitude, 130; Trade, 131;
Leader of House, 187; relationship with Howe, 420; quoted, 422,
440, 589; BL, 440; leaves Cabinet, 589
‘Big Bang’, 311
bill mountain, 695, 696
Birmingham Six, 409
Birt, John, 637
Bishop, Maurice (Prime Minister of Grenada 1979–83), 166, 328–9
Bismarck, Otto von, 791
Blackhawk helicopters, 428
Black Monday, 700, 710
Bluff Cove, 226, 233
Boomibol, King of Thailand, 506
Botha, P.W. (South African Prime Minister 1978–84, State President
1084–89), 514–15, 520, 522, 529
Botha, R.F. (‘Pik’) (South African Foreign Minister 1977-), 514, 529,
532
Boundary Commission, 286
Brandt Commission, 169
Bretton Woods system, 703
Brezhnev, Leonid (Soviet General Secretary 1964–82): invasion of
Afghanistan, 88; arms control proposals (1981), 159, (1979),
241–2; SALT II Agreement, 245; ‘Brezhnev Doctrine’, 258, 790;
cartoon, 324; rise of Gorbachev, 453; Reagan correspondence,
455, 462; era, 458
Brighton Grand Hotel bomb (1984), 368, 371, 379–83, 399, 414
Brilliant, HMS, 225
Bristow, Alan, 425–6
British Aerospace (BAe), 428, 433, 678, 679–80
British Airways, 283, 678, 679
British Antarctic Survey, 180, 640
British Association of Colliery Managers (BACM), 366
British Gas, 284, 681–2

British Leyland (BL): steel supplies, 101, 112; Edwardes
Chairmanship, 114; Corporate Plan, 115–17, 118–19, 120–1;
industrial relations, 117–18, 119–20; Wakeham involvement,
311; privatization, 284, 419, 437–41, 678; Varley-Marshall
assurances, 438, 679; Rover Group, 679–80
British Medical Association (BMA), 616–17
British Museum, 632
British Nationality Bill, 161, 260
British Petroleum (BP), 50, 316
British Rail (BR), 347, 353, 686–7
British Rail Hotels, 678
British Shipbuilders, 284, 678
British Steel Corporation (BSC): coal supplies, 101; strike (1980),
103, 108–14; costs, 127; privatization programme, 283–4, 678,
679; Ravenscraig steel works, 361–2, 622; miners’ strike (1984–
5), 342, 347, 353; dock strikes (1984), 355, 361
British Telecom (BT), 283, 306, 678, 680–1
Britoil, 678
Brittan, Leon (Chief Secretary 1981–83, Home Secretary 1983–85,
Trade and Industry Secretary 1985–86, Vice-President EC
Commission 1989-): Chief Secretary, 131, 309; Home Secretary,
307–8, 418; ‘end-year flexibility’ suggestion, 317; miners’ strike
(1984–5), 345–6; Party Conference (1984), 368; Brighton bomb
(1984), 381; DTI, 419, 426; Westland affair, 426–36; BL, 438–9;
broadcasting, 646; attitude to ERM, 693, 710
Brittan, Samuel, 138
Britto, Keith, 266
Brixton riots (1981), 143–4
broadcasting, 634–8
Broadcasting Act (1989), 636
Broadcasting Standards Council, 636–7
Brogan, Colm, 12
Brooke, Peter (Conservative Party Chairman 1987–89, Northern
Ireland Secretary ’989–92), 414, 749, 756, 852
Brown, Harold, 246
Brownlow, Lord, 23
Bruges speech (1988), 742–6, 749, 755, 833
Buckton, Ray, 372

budgets: (1979), 41–5, 50; (1980), 55, 95–6; (1981), 132–9;
(1982), 270–1; (1983), 271; (1984), 673, 694; (1985), 673;
(1986), 673; (1987), 673; (1988), 673–4; (1989), 674–5; (1990).
622, 675
Bukovsky, Vladimir, 452, 480, 813
Bundesbank, 690, 696, 720, 740, 763, 814
Burke, Edmund, 26, 753, 859
Burnet, Sir Alastair, 291
Burnham, Forbes (Prime Minister then President of Guyana 1964–85),
167
Bush, Barbara, 845
Bush, George (US Vice-President 1981–89, President 1989–93):
Hungarian visit, 455; nuclear talks, 473; G7, 754, 763–4;
relationship with MT, 754, 782–3, 793, 794, 820; Presidential
election (1988), 768; administration, 782–4; German
reunification, 793, 794, 795, 798–9; attitude to Yeltsin, 804; MT
Bermuda meeting (1990), 810; NATO discussions, 810–11;
achievements, 813; Kuwait invasion response, 816–21; Gulf War
build-up, 823–4, 826; CSCE Conference (1990), 842, 845; MT’s
resignation, 857
Buthelezi, Chief Gatsha, 532, 533
Butler, Sir Michael, 720n Butler, R.A., 6n, 12, 43
Butler, Robin (Prime Minister’s Principal Private Secretary 1982–85,
Cabinet Secretary and Head Home Civil Service 1988-), 289, 379,
380, 458, 633
Butskellism, 6
by-elections: Crosby (1981), 153; ‘Falklands factor’, 265; Glasgow
Hillhead (1982), 266; Beaconsfield (1982), 266; Mitcham and
Morden (1982), 266; Peckham (1982), 266; Birmingham
(Northfield) (1982), 266; Bermondsey, 266 (1983); Darlington,
266 (1983); MT’s role, 266–7; Cardiff possibility (1983), 289;
Brecon and Radnor (1985), 416–17; Mid-Staffordshire (1990),
658; Eastbourne (1990), 832; Bootle (1990), 838; Bradford North
(1990), 838
Byelorussia, 801–2
Cabinet, 25–9; confidentiality, 33; public spending arguments,
123–8; reshuffle (January 1981), 130–1; further dissent, 147–50;
reshuffle (September 1981), 150–3; reshuffle (1985), 418–23;
reshuffle (1986), 562–3; reshuffle (1989), 754–8; changes after
Howe’s resignation (1990), 835; leadership election (1990), 850–
5

Cable and Wireless, 678
cable television, 635
Cairns Group, 739
Callaghan, James (Labour Prime Minister 1976–79): government
defeat, 3–4; election campaign (1979), 10, 288; election defeat,
17–18; Policy Unit, 30n; relationship with Schmidt, 35;
leadership resignation, 41; Falklands, 190; election campaign
(1983), 296; civil service pay, 417
Camden, London Borough of, 646
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), 267, 293, 424
Campaign Guide, 286
Camp David, MT’s visit (1984), 466–8; MT’s visit (1986), 472–3
Canada: MT’s visit (1983), 320–2; Constitution, 320; South African
sanctions issue, 523
Canberra, 189, 225
Cancún, ‘North-South’ summit, 167, 168–70, 754
capital punishment, 307, 308, 315
CARICOM, 328
Carlisle, Mark (Education Secretary 1979–81), 151
Carlton Club bomb (1990), 414
Carlton Lecture (1984), 370
Carrington, Peter, Lord (Foreign Secretary 1979–82): Foreign
Secretary, 27; Rhodesia, 73, 74, 76–7; EC budget, 85–6; Iran-Iraq
war, 91; Cabinet reshuffle, 151; US visit (1981), 158; Falklands,
178–9, 185; resignation, 185–6; Defence Review, 249, 250;
Polish crisis, 252, 253; attitude to EMS, 692; MT retirement
suggestion, 832
Carter, Amy, 68
Carter, Jimmy (US President 1977–81): G7, 68, 71; MT’s
assessment, 68–9; Rhodesia, 73; Iran hostage crisis, 86, 88, 156,
825; MT’s visit, 86–7; Afghanistan, 87–8; US economy, 123, 693;
neutron bomb, 241; NATO, 242; Trident, 245–6, 248
Carter, Rosalynn, 68
Cartledge, Sir Brian (Ambassador to USSR 1985–88), 37, 470
Casaroli, Cardinal, 230
cash planning, 137
Castro, Fidel, 329
Catholic Church, 390, 392, 778, 779

Catto, Henry, 817
Cavaco Silva, Anibal (Portuguese Prime Minister 1985-), 752
Ceauşescu, Nicolae (President of Romania 1967–89), 790
Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB): coal stocks (1981),
142; coal stocks (1984), 341, 343; miners’ strike (1984–5), 347,
350, 353, 358–9, 373; oil- fired power stations, 341, 350;
nuclear-powered stations, 341; privatization issues, 682–4
Central Office, 287, 288–9, 291, 421, 574
Central Policy Review Staff (CPRS), 30, 118, 277–8
Centre for Policy Studies, 14
Centre Forward, 416
Challenger tanks, 825, 828
Channel 4, 635, 636, 637
Channel Tunnel, 345
Channon, Paul (Trade and Industry Secretary 1986–87, Transport
Secretary 1987–89): DTI, 437, 639; BL, 437, 440–1; Gorbachev
meeting, 460; South Africa discussions, 515; leaves Cabinet, 756
Chatham, William Pitt, ist Earl, 10
Chatham dockyard, 251
Chelsea Barracks bomb (1981), 393
Cheltenham speech (1990), 661–2
Cheney, Dick (US Secretary for Defense 1989–93), 818, 821
Chequers, 21, 36–7, 860–1
Chernenko, Konstantin (Soviet General Secretary 1984–85), 458,
459, 461, 469, 546
Chernobyl nuclear disaster, 498
Chevaline, 244, 245
Cheysson, Claude (French Minister for External Relations 1981–84),
542
child: abuse, 626, 627; care, 630–1; benefit, 631
Child Support Act (1991), 630
China: MT’s visit (1982), 259–62, 488; Hong Kong sovereignty,
259–62; role, 487; Hong Kong negotiations, 488–95; Tiananmen
Square massacre, 494
Chirac, Jacques (French Prime Minister 1974–76, 1986–88), 729–31,
734–7
Chissano, Joaquim, 527

Chope, Chris, 855
Church of England, 31
Church of Scotland, 704
churches: attitude to education reforms, 593; hostels for young
people, 627
Churchill, Winston (Conservative Prime Minister 1940–5, 1951–5),
23, 193, 468, 481, 483, 829, 851
Cities Policy Group, 282
City Technology Colleges, 592, 593
Civil Contingencies Unit, 356
civil service: interventionist policy, 6; relationship with new
government, 18; recruitment freeze, 32; reform, 45–9; strike
(1981), 139; pay increase for top civil servants, 417
Civil Service College, 47
Civil Service Commission, 47
Civil Service Department (CSD), 47–8
Civil Service Pay Research Unit, 45
Clark, Alan, 853
Clark, Joe (Canadian Prime Minister 1979–80), 68
Clarke, Kenneth (Chancellor of the Duchy 1987–88, Health Secretary
1988–90, Education Secretary 1990–92): Cabinet position, 418;
election campaign (1987), 584; Health, 614; Education, 614;
Health review, 614–16, 756; suitability as successor to MT, 755;
Education, 835; leadership election (1990), 852
Clegg, Hugh, 32
Clegg Commission, 32, 44, 44–5
closed shop, 98, 99, 272–3, 275, 669
clothes, MT’s, 80, 162, 164, 458, 575–6, 779. 845
coal industry: dispute (1981), 139–43; pit closure programme,
139–41, 342–3, 344. 357. 377. 686; overtime ban (1983), 342;
coal stocks (1983), 343–4; miners’ strike (1984–5), 344–78; coal
stocks (1984), 358; electricity privatization, 684, 685;
privatization plans, 685–6; see also National Coal Board, National
Union of Mineworkers
Cockfield, Arthur, Lord (Trade Secretary 1982–83, Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster 1983–84, Vice-President European Commission
1985–88), 547
Coggan, Donald, Archbishop, 31

Cold War, 170–1, 450, 769, 799
Coleman, Professor Alice, 605
COMECON, 457
Common Agricultural Policy, see EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
Commonwealth Games, Edinburgh, 520- 1
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings (CHOGMs):
Lusaka (1979), 52, 67, 71, 73–6, 523
Melbourne (1981), 164, 166–7
New Delhi (1983), 332, 491
Nassau (1985), 504, 515, 516–19, 520, 521
London (Special Conference 1986), 520–4
Vancouver (1987), 522–4, 700
Kuala Lumpur (1989), 502, 530–1, 715, 716
communism: Eastern European collapse, 789–90; Soviet Union,
801; see also Marxism, socialism
Communist Party, 295
community charge: Baker’s role, 420, 650–1, 652; Ridley’s role,
563; Patten’s role, 602, 656–8; abolition, 642; defects of rating
system, 642–7; origins, 647–51; Chequers seminar, 647–9; dual
running, 650–2; abandonment of dual running, 651–5; preparing
for introduction, 655–8; political crisis, 658–63; Trafalgar Square
riot, 661; capping, 663–7; Heseltine and, 666–7; leadership
election campaign (1990), 848–9
Community Housing Trusts, 605
Community Land Act, 39
Confederation of British Industry (CBI): Heath plans, 7; price
controls, 39; trade union reform, 99, 104–5; MT’s relationship,
130, 271; Industrial Trends Survey, 149; Scottish, 621
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE):
preparations for summit (1990), 764; role, 796, 799–800, 805;
summit (1990), 802, 836, 842–3; German reunification, 814
Congdon, Professor Tim, 696
Conqueror, HMS, 214–15
Conquest, Robert, 451, 452
consensus, 167
Conservative Party: Shadow Cabinet, 4, 13n, 14–15; policies, 6–7,
276–80; general election (1979), 17; Conference (1979), 54, 101;
Conference (1980), 122; Central Council, 138, 477; Conference

(1981), 153–5; funding, 275; general election manifesto (1983),
281–5, 305–6; Conference (1984), 365, 367–8, 379–83; problem
issues, 560, 564; Conference (1986), 566–9, 571; general
election manifesto (1987), 570–5; Scottish antipathy, 619;
Scottish, 621; 892 Conference (1989), 714; leadership election
(1989), 830; Conference (1990), 831; leadership question, 832;
leadership election (1990), 840–55, 860–1
Conservative Research Department, 12, 282–3, 286, 291, 567, 859
Conservative Trade Unionists (CTU), 101
Contingency Reserve, 49
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) negotiations, 788, 799–800,
842
Cortonwood colliery, 344
Cossiga, Francesco (Italian Prime Minister 1979–80, President 1985–
92), 82–3, 84, 241, 246
Costa Mendez, Nicanor (Argentinian Foreign Minister 1981–82), 193,
197, 199
Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE), 598
Coventry, HMS, 227, 228
Cradock, Sir Percy (British Ambassador to Peking 1978–83, Prime
Minister’s Foreign Policy Adviser 1984–92), 473, 492
Crawford, Cynthia (‘Crawfie’): Downing St arrival, 25; Brighton
bomb (1984), 380–1; MT’s clothes, 575–6; MT’s toothache, 584;
Lawson resignation, 716; leadership election, 843; Downing St
departure, 858, 861; Chequers departure, 860
Craxi, Bettino (Italian Prime Minister 1983–7). 549–51
crime, see law and order
Criminal Justice Act (1988), 628
Cropper, Peter, 283, 287
cruise (and Pershing) missiles: deployment decision (1979), 156,
241, 243, 245, 300; deployment significance, 171; US
development, 240; ‘dual track’ approach, 240; European
attitudes to deployment, 241, 243–4, 258–9, 269, 318, 323, 335;
opposition to deployment, 267–9, 332, 335; ‘dual key’ question’,
268, 332; deployment preparations, 450; Soviet response to
deployment, 453; defence strategy, 472; INF treaty implications,
771–2; see also NATO, nuclear weapons Cuba, 158–9, 329
Cuckney, Sir John, 426, 429, 431, 434
current account deficit, 668
curriculum, national, 593–7, see also education

Czechoslovakia: Havel Presidency, 789–90; MT’s visit (1990), 808–
9
Daily Express, 103
Daily Mail, 332, 714
Daily Mirror, 295
Davies, Edmund, Lord Justice, 32
Davies, John (Shadow Conservative Foreign Secretary 1976–78), 421
Davy Loewy, 170
Day, Graham (Chairman BL/Rover 1986–91), 679
Day, Sir Robin, 111, 293, 351, 586
Deal Music School bomb (1989), 414
defence: spending, 49, 51, 125, 128, 185, 237, 316; MT’s
objectives, 237; political issue, 267–70; unilateralism, 267–8;
policy group, 565; troops in Germany, 772; see also cruise,
NATO, nuclear weapons, Trident
Defence Review (1981), 177, 185, 249–51
de Gaulle, Charles (French President 1958–69), 82, 85, 798, 802,
806, 815
Deidesheim, MT’s visit (1989), 746–8, 786–7
de Klerk, F.W. (South African State President 1989-), 529, 531–4
de la Billière, Sir Peter (Commander British Forces in the Middle East,
1990–1), 90, 825–6
Delors, Jacques (President of EC Commission 1985-): Finance
minister, 338, 547; President of European Commission, 547, 740;
EC objectives, 551, 555, 742, 759, 833; Luxemburg Council, 555,
556; Presidential style, 558–9; MT’s relationship, 558, 726, 740;
EMU Report, 708, 709, 720, 721, 725, 750; Brittan conversation,
710; CAP, 736; TUC address, 742; Rome European Council, 766–
7, 802; Gorbachev meeting, 767
‘demand side’ problems, 668–9
Democracy in Trade Unions (Green Paper), 275, 284
Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), 387, 394
Deng Xiaoping (Chinese ruler 1977-), 260–2, 488–9, 491, 492, 493–
4
Denmark: economy, 7; farming subsidies, 731–2; EMU approach,
741
DEPARTMENTS AND MINISTRIES

Agriculture, Ministry of, 729–30
Defence, Ministry of (MOD): overspending (1980), 125; Falklands
media management, 230; overspending (1983), 316; Westland
affair, 425, 427; ABM Treaty interpretation, 465
Education and Science, Department of (DES), 13, 51, 592, 594, 597
Employment, Department of, 51
Energy, Department of, 141, 350, 685
Environment, Department of the (DoE): housing policy, 602–6,
621; community charge, 648–50, 655, 658, 663
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO): Falklands position, 175–
6, 181–2; qualities, 309; Soviet seminar, 451; nuclear policies,
465; Hong Kong negotiations, 489; European policies, 559; ERM
question, 691, 695; Walters currency proposals, 725; Soviet
Union break-up, 801
Health, Department of, 614, 617
Health and Social Security, Department of (DHSS), 47, 50, 608–13,
614
Home Office, 628, 634, 636, 638
Industry, Department of, 26, 120
Northern Ireland Office (NIO), 399
Overseas Development Administration (ODA), 525
Scottish Office, 619–23
Social Security, Department of (DSS), 603, 614
Trade and Industry, Department of (DTI): Westland 425, 426, 429,
434; BL, 438; gas privatization, 681; rail privatization study, 687
Transport, Department of, 687, 756
Treasury: forecasts, 51; conduct of monetary policy, 134; public
spending cuts, 148; ‘end-year flexibility’, 317; universities, 599;
housing reforms, 602; NHS review, 609; attitude to NHS funding
proposals, 610, 612, 615–16; child benefit debate, 631;
broadcasting franchises, 637; community charge, 655–7, 662,
663; Lawson budget spies, 672; gas privatization, 681; rail
privatization study, 687; ERM question, 691–2, 695, 721;
exchange rate intervention, 702; inflation paper (1989), 710;
Walters currency proposals, 725
dependency culture, 627
deutschmark (DM), 668, 675, 690, 697, 699–705, 722, 763
devaluation, 714
Diego Garcia, 246

Dimbleby, Jonathan, 585
Diplock, Lord, 106
dirty protest, 58, 389, 391
disarmament, see nuclear weapons
Disraeli, Benjamin, 37
District Health Authorities (DHAs), 608, 615, 617
divorce, 628, 630
dock strikes (1984), 355–7, 361–2
doctors, see British Medical Association, health
Dooge, James, 550
Douglas-Home, Sir Alec (Conservative Prime Minister 1963–64), 13,
20, 66, 829
Downing Street (No. 10): Policy Unit, 19, 30, 283, 428, 597, 605,
614, 617, 640, 831; Political Office, 19, 21; Press Office, 19;
Private Office, 19, 20; staff, 19–20; hours of work, 20; living
arrangements, 21; furnishing, 23–4
Druze, 327
Dubai: MT’s visit (1981), 163; MT’s visit (1988), 506–7
du Cann, Sir Edward, 296
Duff, Sir Antony, 76
Duport Steels, 103, 106
Eagleburger, Lawrence, 158
Eastern Europe, 769–70, 789–90
Eaton, Michael, 365
Eban, Abba, 511
E (Cabinet Committee), 39, 274, 394, 429, 639
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), see under EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY and MONETARY POLICY
Economist, 277, 446–7
Economy Policy Group, 565
Eden, Anthony (Conservative Prime Minister 1955–7), 66, 483, 851
Eden, Clarissa, 362
Eden, Sir John, 286
education: importance, 5; assisted places scheme, 39, 591;
computers, 271; parent power, 278; vouchers, 278, 279, 578,

591–2, 614, 831; reform programme, 279–80, 306, 590–2;
teacher training, 280; curriculum, 280, 570, 590–1, 593–7;
Northern Ireland, 386; standards, 562; parental choice, 562, 591;
testing, 570, 593–4; funding, 570, 591; open enrolment, 570,
591; grant-maintained schools, 570–1, 578, 592–3, 597;
manifesto (1987), 570–1, 578, 590; selection, 578; centres of
excellence, 578–9; City Technology Colleges, 592, 593; LMS,
592; national curriculum, 593–7; teacher training, 597–8;
universities, 598–9; student loans, 598; Scotland, 620–1
Education Policy Group, 282
Education Reform Act (1988), 591
Edwardes, Sir Michael (Chairman BL 1977–82), 114–20
Edwards, Nicholas (Welsh Secretary 1979–87), 110, 565
Efficiency Unit, 30
Egypt, MT’s visit (1985), 508
EH 101 helicopter project, 425, 429
Eisenhower, USS, 227
Eksund, 406, 731
elderly people, 606
Election Call, 587
elections, general: (1979), 4–5, 15, 17; Conservative manifesto
(1983), 281–5; campaign planning (1983), 285–9; campaign
(1983), 291–304; Conservative manifesto (1987), 569–75;
campaign (1987), 576–88; see also by-elections and European
Parliament (under EUROPEAN COMMUNITY)
electricity: prices, 52; privatization, 682–4
Elizabeth II, Queen: MT’s audiences with, 17–18, 208, 850, 861;
African tour (1979), 74; Falklands War, 180–1, 208; US invasion
of Grenada, 330; Australian Bicentennial, 504
El Salvador, 158, 159, 322, 383
Eminent Persons Group (EPG), 518–19, 520
employment: new jobs, 668; labour mobility, 670–1; see also
unemployment
Employment Acts: (1980), 97–108; (1982), 272–4; (1984), 279;
(1988), 669; (1990), 669
Employment Policy Group, 565
Employment Protection Act (1975), 102
EMU, see Economic and Monetary Union under EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY and MONETARY POLICY

Enders, Thomas, 192
Endurance, HMS, 177, 178
Energy Act (1983), 682
Engineering Employers’ Federation (EEF), 98
Enniskillen bomb (1987), 406
Enterprise Policy Group, 282
Enterprise Zones, 44, 95
Enthoven, Professor Alain, 607
environment, 638–41; pollution issue, 563, 639
ERM, see Exchange Rate Mechanism under EUROPEAN
COMMUNITY and MONETARY POLICY
Estate Action programme, 605, 621
European Commission on Human Rights, 391
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY

Agriculture Council, 85, 257, 732
budget issues: British contribution, 62–4, 83–6, 91, 257, 537–45;
Financial Mechanism, 62; agreement (1980), 78–86; financing,
313–14; discussion (1983), 336–8; deficit (1987), 728
Central Bank proposals, 738, 740–1
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), 728–37; Walker’s approach,
28; cost, 62, 336; wastefulness, 62; French approach, 62, 84;
German approach, 62, 257. 313, 319, 544; British net
contribution, 80, 257, 319; Bruges speech, 745
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), 690–1; Lawson’s views,
554, 691, 708, 716; Delors Report, 707–8, 720–1, 723, 746, 750;
Major’s views, 719; discussions (1990), 719–21; no compromise,
724–6; EC discussions (1988), 740–2, (1989), 759–60, (1990),
763, 765–6
enlargement, 545–8, 769–70
European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), 759
European Commission: budget settlement pressure, 80; Presidency,
547, 558–9, 740; water policies, 638; ERM, 691; federalist
project, 728; rebate mechanism, 729; role, 743
European Councils:
Strasbourg (1979), 61–4, 79
Dublin (1979), 79–82
Luxemburg (1980), 83–5, 388, 390
Venice (1980), 90

Brussels (1982), 178
Stuttgart (1983), 312–14, 319
Athens (1983), 318, 319, 335–8, 537, 538
Brussels (1984), 346, 538–41
Fontainebleau (1984), 541–4, 728, 733
Dublin (1984), 545–6
Brussels (1985), 546–7
Milan (1985), 401, 548–51
Luxemburg (1985), 550, 551, 554–7
Hague (1986), 519, 522
London (1986), 557–9
Brussels (1987), 729–31
Copenhagen (1987), 729, 731–3, 736–7
Brussels (1988), 733, 735–7
Hanover (1988), 409–10, 707–8, 737, 740–1
Rhodes (1988), 746–7, 784–5
Madrid (1989), 710–13, 741, 750–2, 760
Strasbourg (1989), 759–60, 796–7
Dublin (1990), 726, 760–3
Rome (1990), 764–7, 832, 837
European Court of Justice (ECJ), 80, 743
European Currency Unit (ecu), 63; ‘hard’, 720, 741, 750, 762, 765,
833
European Democratic Group (EDG), 749
European Democratic Union (EDU), 500
European Magna Carta, 800, 808, 842
European Monetary Fund proposals, 720, 721, 750
European Monetary System (EMS), see Exchange Rate Mechanism
European Parliament: elections (1979), 60, 61; elections (1984),
537, 540; powers, 554; MT’s speech (1986), 558; elections
(1989), 711, 748–50, 754
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM): MT’s attitude, 63, 554; German
views, 63, 83, 692; Lawson’s attitude, 554, 566, 691, 693–700,
709–13, 722; Major’s policy, 690; path to EMU, 690–1;
discussions (1979–82), 691–3; arguments (1985), 693–8, (1989),
709–14; ‘Madrid conditions’, 712–13, 718, 719, 722, 723;

discussion (1990), 719–21; entry of sterling, 721–4
Falklands crisis, Argentina embargo, 190–1, 223, 548
Franco-German axis, 61, 727–8, 759–63, 790, 814–15
Integrated Mediterranean Programmes, 545, 546
Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC), 549–51, 555, 711, 720, 725,
750–2, 759–61, 765–7
Monetary Committee, 721
monetary compensation amounts (MCAs), 336
Political Union (federalist project), 727–8, 742, 760–3, 814–15,
833
Single European Act, 555–7, 558, 741
Single Market, 551–4; MT’s hopes, 545, 547, 549, 745;
implementing, 557; EMU, 708; progress, 727; Bruges speech,
745; Social Charter, 751
Social Charter, 750–2, 759–60
South Africa sanctions issue, 515- 16, 521–2, 534
sovereignty issue, 690
European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism (ECST), 401,
402–3, 405
exchange controls, see MONETARY POLICY
exchange rate, see MONETARY POLICY
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM), see EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
and MONETARY POLICY
Exocet missiles, 212, 216, 226–7, 233–4
EXPO ’88, 505
export markets, 5, 689
Ezra, Sir Derek (Chairman NCB 1971–82), 140–1
Face the Nation, 771
Face the People, 586
Fahd, King of Saudi Arabia (1982-), 818, 820–2
Fair Trading, Director-General of, 40
Falkland Islands: history, 174–5; Communications Agreement, 175,
197; lease-back proposals, 175–6; invasion, 177; retaken, 234–5;
MT’s visit, 234
Falklands War: significance, 173–4, 235; task force, 179, 183, 189,
194, 201; War Cabinet, 188–9, 200, 209, 212, 221, 223, 224,

234–5; Haig negotiations, 188, 190, 191–200, 202–8, 210–11,
216, 217, 222–3, 224, 229–30; Haig proposals, 194–5; bombing
of runway at Port Stanley, 212; Belgrano sinking, 214–16;
Peruvian peace proposals, 215, 216, 217; Sheffield sinking, 216–
17; SAS raid, 222; UK final proposals, 222–3; taskforce landing,
223–5; Harriers, 226, 227–8; Atlantic Conveyor loss, 227–8;
Darwin and Goose Green retaken, 229–30; media reporting, 229–
30; Bluff Cove, 233; Port Stanley assault and retaking, 233–5;
‘Falklands factor’, 264, 266; financing, 270; MT’s experience
useful for Gulf War, 817, 826
Fallon, Michael, 856
Family Health Service Authorities, 608n
family policies, 282, 565, 628–32
Family Policy Group, 279
Fearless, HMS, 189, 248
Federal Reserve, US, 693
Fergusson, Sir Ewen (British Ambassador to France 1987–93), 843
Fianna Fail Party, 388
Fiat, 428, 430–1
Fieldhouse, Sir John (C-in-C Fleet 1981–82, Chief of Naval Staff and
First Sea Lord 1982–85), 189, 205, 214, 226
Fieldhouse, Midge, Lady, 205
Figaro, Le, 82
Financial Services Act (1986), 311
Financial Times, 138, 701, 715
Finchley constituency: MT’s work, 22; work during Falklands crisis,
224–5; election campaign (1983), 302, 303; Jewish population,
509, 577; twinning, 512; Ugandan Asian population, 517;
election campaign (1987), 577, 587–8; rates issue, 644
Fine Gael, 388
Fitt, Gerry (Leader SDLP 1970–79), 395
FitzGerald, Garret (Irish Prime Minister 1981–82, 1983–87): EC
budget, 337, 544; compared with Haughey, 388, 393; hunger
strikes, 392; MT’s relationship, 393, 410; Northern Ireland
discussions, 395–6, 398–402; Anglo-Irish Agreement, 402–5,
407; VAT issue, 538
Fletcher, Michael, 371
Fletcher, WPC Yvonne, 351, 442
FI-II aircraft, 239, 443, 445, 447, 772

Foot, Michael (Leader, Labour Party 1980–83): Falklands, 210, 224;
Labour leadership, 265–6, 360; unilateralism, 267; election
campaign (1983), 287, 295, 296; Maze hunger strikers, 391
Ford of Europe, 439–41, 679
Foreign Affairs Policy Group, 565
Forsyth, Frederick, 362
Forsyth, Michael, 620–3, 856
Fowler, Norman (Transport Minister 1979–81, Health and Social
Security Secretary 1981–87, Employment Secretary 1987–90):
Transport, 29; DHSS, 151, 277; Family Policy Group, 279; BL
debate, 440; health targets, 571; election campaign (’987), 583–
4. 584; NHS discussions, 607; leadership election campaign
(1990), 840
France: economy, 7; EC role, 61, 540–1; lamb imports, 80, 84, 85;
nuclear energy, 140, 341; Polish crisis, 254; nuclear deterrent,
323; Lebanon involvement, 328, 333–4; Libya policy, 442–3,
446; educational system, 591; federalist project, 727–8, 760–3,
814–15; elections (1988), 731, 734; Revolution Bicentennial
(1989), 752–4; German reunification, 796–7; attitude to US
European presence, 815; Gulf crisis, 819; see also Mitterrand
Francis of Assisi, St, 19
Franks Committee, 177
Fraser, Malcolm, 71, 76, 191, 519
Frederick the Great, 191
free enterprise, 6–7
free trade, 739, 764
Freight Rover (FR), 438, 441
French Revolution, MT’s remarks (1989), 753
Friedman, Professor Milton, 618, 710n, 804
Frost, David, 584, 586
Fulton Committee Report, 47
Gaddafi, Colonel Muammar (Libyan ruler 1969-): NUM contact,
351, 368–9; IRA supporter, 384, 401; US bombing of Libya, 442–
4, 446, 449
Gaisman, Tessa, 285
Gaitskell, Hugh, 6n
Galtieri, General Leopoldo (Argentine President 1981–82): comes to
power, 176; Reagan contacts, 179–80, 201–2; Haig diplomacy,

193, 197–8; proposals, 224
Gandhi, Indira (Indian Prime Minister 1966–77, 1980–84), 161–2,
169, 368, 504
Gandhi, Rajiv (Indian Prime Minister 1984–89), 426, 504, 517, 521,
523
Gandhi, Sonia, 504
Garda, 397–8
Gardiner, Sir George, 855
Garel-Jones, Tristan, 830, 850, 854
gas: prices, 52; privatization, 681–2
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), 496, 732, 738–
40, 745, 764–5
GCHQ, Cheltenham, 139n
Gdansk: Lenin Shipyard, 778, 779, 780–1; MT’s visit (1988), 780–2
GEC, 431
Gemayel, Amin (President of the Lebanon 1982–88), 327
General and Municipal Workers’ Union (GMWU), 111
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, 704
General Belgrano, 214–16, 217, 296, 302
General Council of British Shipping, 356
General Motors (GM), 438, 439, 440–1
Genscher, Hans-Dietrich (German Foreign Minister and Deputy
Chancellor 1974–92), 335, 736, 740, 774, 785, 793
George II, King, 24
Germany: economy, 5, 7, 94; EC role, 61, 313, 552; NATO nuclear
policies, 240, 241, 258–9, 268, 323, 335, 771–2, 774–5, 784–7;
Polish crisis, 254; Berlin Wall, 263, 759, 789, 793; MT’s visit
(1983), 318, 319; South African sanctions issue, 522; farmers,
544, 731, 732–3, 734, 736, 766; reunification, 552, 759, 769,
783, 792–6, 813; monetary union (EMU) policy, 554, 555, 720;
European objectives, 556, 760–1; Bundesbank, 690, 696, 720,
740, 763, 814; hyperinflation experience, 707; interest rates,
707, 714, 814; Social Charter, 751; US relationship, 768, 783–4,
789; MT’s attitude to ‘German Question’, 769, 790–1, 813–15;
Gorbachev’s influence, 783; fall of Honecker, 789; border with
Poland, 797, 799; see also Kohl, Schmidt
Gersons, 224
Gibraltar: shooting of IRA terrorists (1988), 407, 409; discussions
with Spain, 746

Gilmour, Sir Ian (Lord Privy Seal 1979–81): Foreign Office, 28–9;
EC budget, 86; trade union reform, 105; economic critique, 130;
dismissed, 151
Giscard d’Estaing, Valéry (French President 1974–81): Downing
Street visit, 24; EC, 61–4, 552; G7, 69–70, 84; Trident, 246
Glamorgan, HMS, 233–4
glasnost, 475
Glemp, Cardinal, 778
Gleneagles Agreement, 166
Glenholmes, Evelyn, 405
global warming, 640
Glover, Eleanor, Lady, 845
González, Felipe (Spanish Prime Minister 1982-), 546, 746, 752,
767, 793
Goodlad, Alastair, 835
Goold, Sir James, 621, 647
Gorbachev, Mikhail (Soviet President 1985–91): Trudeau’s
impression, 321; NUM connection, 369; public image, 437. 453;
MT’S attitude, 452–3, 770, 774, 800–1, 813; embassy deal, 458;
Chequers visit (1984), 459- 63, 468, 474; Soviet leadership, 469,
475; Geneva summit with Reagan, 470; Reykjavik, 470–2; MT’s
Moscow visit (1987), 474, 478–85; Perestroika, 475, 773, 803–4;
de Klerk comparison, 532; ‘Gorby-mania’, 747; Delors meeting,
767; INF treaty (1987), 771, 774; MT’s discussions (1987), 772–
4; Reagan Washington summit (1987), 774; Afghanistan
withdrawal, 774; influence on Germany, 783; UK visit (1989),
786; Soviet changes, 790; MT’s visit (1989), 792, 802; German
reunification, 798–9, 805; Yeltsin opposition, 803–4; MT’s Soviet
visit (1990), 805–6; CSCE summit (1990), 843, 845; MT’s
resignation, 858
Gorbachev, Raisa, 459, 461, 470, 478, 480, 483–4, 773, 786
Gordievsky, Oleg, 470, 476, 774
Gormley, Joe (President NUM 1971–82), 140
Gould, Bryan, 581
Gow, Ian (PPS to Prime Minister 1979–83): PPS, 29–30; memo on
backbench morale, 132;. Cabinet reshuffle, 151; frames
quotations from Powell, 184n; Falklands, 185; election campaign
(1983), 285, 288; Anglo-Irish proposals, 394; resignation, 403;
murder, 414–15, 822; leadership election campaign (1989), 830
Gow, Jane, 414–15

Gowrie, Grey, Lord (Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 1984–85),
420
Granada 500, 293
grant-maintained schools, 570–1, 578, 592–3, 597
grant-related expenditure assessments (GREAs), 643
Greater London Council (GLC), 284, 305
Greece: EC membership, 545–6; support for German EC proposals,
763
Greenham Common, 243
Grenada: Bishop government, 166; military coup, 328–9; US
invasion, 328–32, 334–5, 818
Griffiths, Professor Brian (Head of Prime Minister’s Policy Unit 1985–
90): Strategy Group, 565; education proposals, 570, 592, 597–9;
Manifesto Committee, 572; education in Scotland, 620–1; ERM
question, 700
Griffiths Report, 47
Gromyko, Andrei (Soviet Foreign Minister 1957–85), 242, 458, 451,
468, 469
G7 (Group of Seven) summits:
Tokyo (1979), 65–71
Ottawa (1981), 164–6, 739
Versailles (1982), 192, 231–2, 256–8
Williamsburg (1983), 290, 299–301, 586
Tokyo (1986), 498–9
Venice (1987), 586
Toronto (1988), 737, 738–40
Paris (1989), 752, 754, 759
Houston (1990), 762, 763–4
Guardian, 43, 52, 561
Guise, George, 640
Gulbenkian Collection, 633
Gulf: British withdrawal from (1970), 8, 162; Armilla Patrol, 91,
164, 816; MT’s visit (1981), 162–4, 817
Gulf Co-operation Council, 163
Gulf War: Belgian policy, 414; scud missile attacks on Israel, 507;
Anglo-American relations, 769; build-up to, 822–8

Gummer, John (Party Chairman 1983–85, Agriculture Minister 1989–
92): election campaign (1983), 292; Party Chairman, 310, 311,
421; Brighton bomb (1984), 380, 381; local government finance
review, 646; Agriculture Minister, 757, 758; leadership election
campaign (1990), 849, 851; MT’s resignation, 856
Gummer, Penny, 379, 380
Habibie, Professor BJ., 503
Hadfields, 107, 112
Hague, Professor Douglas, 126
Haig, Alexander (Supreme Allied Commander in Europe 1974–79, US
Secretary of State 1981–82): MT’s Washington visit (1981), 158;
Falklands crisis, 176, 178; shuttle diplomacy, 181; Falklands
negotiations, 188, 190, 191–200, 202–8, 210–11, 216, 217, 222–
3, 224, 229–30; Falklands proposals, 194–8; Peruvian peace
plan, 216, 217; British Falklands landings, 229, 230; UN vote,
232; NATO, 240; Polish crisis, 253, 255
Hailsham, Quintin Hogg, Lord (Lord Chancellor 1979–87), 28, 37
Hamilton, Archie (PPS to the Prime Minister 1987–88), 411, 822
Hammond, Eric, 363
Hanna, Vincent, 588
Hanrahan, Brian, 214
Harlech, Lord, 72–3
Harper, Ross, 621
Harris, Robin, 565, 570, 572
Harrison, Margaret, 630
Harrods bomb (1983), 397
Hart, David, 365
Hassan, King of Morocco (1961-), 526
Hastings, Sir Stephen, 212
Haughey, Charles (Irish Prime Minister 1979–81, 1982–83, 1987–
92): relationship with MT, 388, 410; compared with FitzGerald,
388, 393; hunger strikers, 390; Anglo-Irish Agreement, 405, 40910; extradition issue, 407; US speech (1988), 408–9; EC, 760,
762
Havel, Václav (President of Czechoslovakia 1989–92), 789–90, 808–
9, 813, 826
Havers, Michael (Attorney General 1979–87, Lord Chancellor 1987):
picketing issue, 107, 346, 348; Falklands, 189, 214, 228–9;

miners’ strike (1984–5), 346–8, 374; NUM funds, 374
Hawke, Bob (Australian Prime Minister 1983–91), 504–5, 516–17,
519, 521, 530–1
Hayek, Friedrich von, 12, 618, 716
Healey, Denis (Chancellor of the Exchequer 1974–79), 26, 53, 210,
296, 301, 576
health: hospitals, 47, 581–2, 608, 611, 613–14, 615–16, 617; MT’s
approach to people’s concerns, 562; manifesto (1987), 571, 577;
election campaign (1987), 585; private care, 585, 607; reform
programme, 606–17; elderly people, 606; review (1988), 608–9;
private insurance schemes, 610, 612; self-governing (trust)
hospitals, 611, 613–14, 615–16, 617; medical audit, 613; GP
budget holders, 614–15; see also National Health Service
Heath, Edward (Conservative Prime Minister 1970–74): government,
7, 13–14, 20, 108, 162, 692; defeat, 14, 17; interventionist
policies, 14, 167; CPRS, 30; Party Conference speech, 154–5;
attack on MT, 167; Falklands Communications Agreement, 175;
BL debate, 440; rates abolition pledge, 644; EC membership,
700; EMU approach, 741; European elections (1989), 749–50;
leadership, 829
Helms, Jesse, 160
Helsinki Final Act (1975), 478, 794, 795
Henderson, Sir Nicholas (Ambassador to Washington 1979-82), 182,
188, 191, 204, 211, 221–2
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate (HMI), 593–4, 597
Hermes, HMS, 179, 185, 202, 228
Heseltine, Michael (Environment Secretary 1979–83, Defence
Secretary 1983–86): Merseyside work, 144, 424; ‘dual key’
option, 268; Family Policy Group, 279; election campaign
(1983), 296–7; Lebanon MNF, 326, 327; Grenada, 330, 331;
Environment, 420, 424; Westland affair, 423–37; MT’s
relationship with, 423–4, 829–30; Defence, 424; Gorbachev visit,
460; US visit (1985), 469; local government finance review, 643–
4; community charge, 666–7; council tax, 667; suitability as
successor to MT, 755; leadership challenge, 829, 834, 835–8,
839, 840; leadership campaign, 840, 841, 844, 847–50, 852–3,
860–1
Heysel Football Stadium riot, 413
Hindawi, Nezar, 510
History Working Group (National Curriculum), 595–6
homelessness, 603–4

Homestart, 630
Honda, 116, 438, 439
Honecker, Erich (East German Head of State 1976–89), 789
Hong Kong: MT’s China visit (1982), 259–62; Joint Declaration,
466; concern for future, 487; Executive Council (EXCO), 491,
492; Joint Liaison Group, 491–2
Hoskyns, John: Policy Unit, 30; ‘Stepping Stones’, 42; quoted, 56;
trade union reform, 104; monetary policy, 133, 135; Central
Council, 138; Cabinet reshuffle, 152; successor, 278
hospitals, see health
housing: council house sales, 39, 279, 306, 563, 602, 604, 605,
623; private rented sector, 39, 563, 600, 601, 605, 670–1;
mortgages, 315, 600, 602, 671, 674, 698; benefit, 563, 600–1;
tenancy reforms, 571, 599–601, 671; manifesto (1987), 571,
577, 589, 600, 602; reforms, 599–601; home ownership, 600,
601, 604, 605, 623, 671; local authority housing accounts, 600,
601; ‘flexi-ownership’, 602, 604; Scotland, 602, 621, 623; ‘Rents
to Mortgages’, 602, 604, 623; homelessness, 603; Estate Action
programme, 605, 621; council estate unemployment culture,
671; market (1988), 674, 706
Housing Action Trusts (HATs), 571, 600–1, 605
Housing Associations, 571, 599, 604
Housing Corporation, 599
Howard, Michael (Employment Secretary 1990–92), 422, 755, 849,
852
Howe, Derek, 285
Howe, Elspeth, 37, 380, 381, 757
Howe, Sir Geoffrey (Chancellor of the Exchequer 1979–83, Foreign
Secretary 1983–89, Leader HC 1989–90): Shadow Chancellor, 15;
Chancellor of Exchequer, 26; budget (1979), 31, 42–5, 50;
Chequers lunch, 37; public spending cuts, 51, 53, 127, 149;
budget (1980), 55, 95; trade union reform, 100, 104; BL, 118,
120–1; economic strategy, 123, 125–6; friendship with Leon
Brittan, 131; budget (1981), 132–7; Cabinet discussions, 148;
Party Conference (1981), 154–5; Falklands, 188; budget (1982),
270; public expenditure review (1982), 276–7; Family Policy
Group, 279; election manifesto (1983), 281, 283, 284–5; election
campaign (1983), 288, 293, 294, 297; Foreign Secretary, 309–
10, 418; defence spending, 316; Lebanon MNF, 326, 333;
Grenada, 330, 331; EC, 335, 736; Brighton bomb (1984), 380,
381; Anglo-Irish Agreement, 405; Northern Ireland speech, 409;
Biffen relations, 420; Westland, 428; US bombing of Libya, 443,

445; Gorbachev visit (1984), 460, 461; US visit (1985), 469;
Hong Kong negotiations, 489, 491–2; South African issues, 514,
515, 518; South Africa visit, 520; EC budget, 537; Milan Council,
548, 550–1; Strategy Group, 565; style as Chancellor, 672, 673;
exchange rate concerns, 688–9; ERM question, 691–2, 693, 695,
697–8, 704, 709–12, 750; relations with MT, 704, 711–12, 718,
757, 758, 839–40; Madrid ambush, 710–12; resignation threat,
712; Leader of the House, 715, 757, 834; European elections
(1989), 749; suitability as successor to MT, 755, 756; Foreign
Secretary dismissal, 756, 757, 834; refuses Home Office, 757;
Deputy PM, 757; single currency statement, 832–3; resignation,
834–7; Commons statement, 838, 839–40
Howell, David (Energy Secretary 1979–81, Transport Secretary 1981–
83), 140–2, 151, 283, 307
Hua Guo Feng, 260
Huddleston, Bishop Trevor, 514
Hughes, Bill, 621
Hume, John (Leader SDLP 1979-), 404
Hungary: MT’s visit (1984), 454–8; Austrian border open, 789;
MT’s visit (1990), 809
hunger strikes (Maze Prison), 388–93
Hunt, David, 657
Hunt, Sir John (Cabinet Secretary 1973–79), 31
Hunt, Mavis Amanda, 234
Hunt, Rex (Governor Falkland Islands (1980–82, Civil Commissioner
1982–85), 180, 187, 196, 234
Hurd, Douglas (Northern Ireland Secretary 1984–85, Home Secretary
1985–89, Foreign Secretary 1989-): Northern Ireland Secretary,
399; Anglo-Irish Agreement, 405; Home Secretary, 419; Foreign
Secretary, 531; South Africa sanctions issue, 531; Strategy
Group, 565; broadcasting policies, 636, 637; community charge,
666; EMU question, 726; suitability as successor to MT, 755;
Kohl meeting, 765–6; German reunification, 793; Gulf crisis,
816–17, 822, 824, 827, 834; leadership election campaign
(1990), 840, 844, 847, 850, 851, 852, 853, 858, 861; MT’s
resignation, 856, 857
Hussein, King of Jordan (1933-): Falklands crisis, 183; MT’s visit
(1985), 508–9; peace initiative, 508–9, 512; Gulf crisis, 816–17,
822, 824
Hussein, Saddam (Iraqi ruler 1979-), 91, 769, 817–22, 823–8, 831
Hussey, Marmaduke (Chairman BBC Board of Governors 1986-), 637

Hu Yaobang, 493
Hyde Park bomb (1982), 394
Ibbs, Robin (Prime Minister’s Adviser on Efficiency in Government
1983–88), 48, 118
ICI, help to USSR, 480
Iliescu, Ion (President of Romania 1990-), 802
immigration, 307, 553, 555
imports, 689
incomes policy, 14, 42, 93–4, 126
Independence, USS, 329–30
Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA), 637
Independent Television Commission (ITC), 637–8
India, MT’s visit (1981), 161–2
individualism, 626–7
Indonesia, MT’s visit (1985), 503
Industrial Charter, 12
inflation: rise, 8; control, 33, 123, 673, 690, 694, 709; (1979), 42,
52, 53; (1980), 123–126; (1981), 136, 153; (1982), 272; (1983),
315; US, 322; role of taxation, 673–4; first term success, 688;
effect of Lawson’s policies, 691; (1986), 698–9; (1988–9), 706–7,
710, 714–15, 718, 830; (1990), 675, 724, 831
information technology (IT), 271
Information Technology Year (1982), 271
INF treaty (1987), 771, 773, 774, 784
Ingham, Bernard (Chief Press Secretary 1979–90): relationship with
MT, 20; public expenditure discussions (1980), 130; coal dispute
(1981), 140; TSRB recommendations (1985), 417; Nigerian visit
(1988), 525; leadership election (1990), 835, 843; MT’s
resignation, 856
Inkatha, 533
Inner London Educational Authority (ILEA), 590, 650, 652–3
Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile (ICBM), 465
interest rates, see MONETARY POLICY
International Democratic Union (IDU), 499–500
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 42, 169–70, 522, 525, 526–7
International Transport Workers’ Federation, 103

interventionist policies, 6, 8, 92–3
Intrepid, HMS, 248
investment: state direction, 8; opportunities, 671; state-owned
industries, 677
Investment Income Surcharge, 673
Invincible, HMS, 179, 181, 185, 202, 228
IRA: Mountbatten murder, 56; Warrenpoint bomb (1979), 56–7;
Irish-American support, 58, 166, 384, 415; Brighton bomb
(1984), 368, 371, 379–83, 399, 414; terrorist problem, 383–4;
hunger strikes, 389–93; Chelsea Barracks bomb (1981), 393;
Hyde Park and Regent’s Park bombs (1982), 394- 5; Harrods
bomb (1983), 397; Mill Hill bomb (1988), 410; Ballygawley
bomb (1988), 411; broadcasting ban, 412; Deal bomb (1989),
414; Gow murder, 414–15
Iran: fall of Shah, 42, 156; US hostages, 69, 86–8, 156, 825;
London embassy siege, 89–90, 826; war with Iraq, 91, 162, 163–
4, 487, 824
Iraq: war with Iran, 91, 162, 163–4, 487, 824; invasion of Kuwait,
164; 816–22; British hostages, 823, 827
Ireland, see Irish Republic, Northern Ireland Irish Commission for
Justice and Peace (ICJP), 392
Irish National Liberation Army (INLA), 396
Irish Republic: Falklands stance, 191, 216, 225, 394; EC, 337, 539;
Anglo-Irish summit (1980), 390; Anglo-Irish relations, 393–6;
Anglo-Irish Agreement background, 396–402; Anglo-Irish
Agreement, 402–6, 409- 10, 413–415
Iron and Steel Trades Confederation (ISTC), 103, 106, 109–13
‘Iron Lady’, 65, 184
Israel: EC discussions, 90–1; peace talks, 322; Lebanon, 326–7;
refuseniks, 460, 476, 484, 510; ‘land for peace’, 507, 511; Gulf
War, 507; MT’s visit (1986), 510–12
Italy: economy, 7; Falklands crisis, 191, 223; nuclear policy, 241;
IGC plans, 549–51, 555; Rome European Council, 765
ITV, 588, 634–7
Ivashko, Vladimir, 807
Jaguar, 438
Jakobovits, Immanuel, 510
Jankowski, Father, 781

Japan: trade balance, 64; G7, 164–5, 738–9; Falklands, 191, 231–2;
MT’s visit (1982), 259, 496–7; role, 487; trade negotiations, 495–
6; MT’s visit (1986), 498–9; MT’s visit (1989), 499–501; business
investment, 668; agricultural policy, 738–9
Jaruzelski, General Wojciech (Polish Prime Minister 1981–85,
President 1985–90), 251, 253. 777–82, 789
Jay, Douglas, 6
Jayewardene, Junius Richard (President of Sri Lanka 1978–88),
503–4, 517–18
Jenkin, Patrick (Health and Social Security Secretary 1979–81,
Industry Secretary 1981–83, Environment Secretary 1983–85), 55n,
151, 294, 420, 644, 646
Jenkins, Roy, Lord (President European Commission 1977–81), 84,
266, 298
Jenkins, Simon, 841
John Brown Engineering, 254
John Paul II, Pope, 390, 778
Jones, Colonel ‘H’, 229
Jones, Michael, 840
Jopling, Michael (Chief Whip 1979–83, Agriculture Secretary 1983–
87), 25, 151, 288, 460, 840–1
Jordan, MT’s visit (1985), 508–9
Joseph, Sir Keith (Industry Secretary 1979–81, Education Secretary
1981–86): political beliefs, 7, 14, 312; Industry, 26, 131;
Chequers lunch, 37; monetary policy, 53, 135, 421; trade union
reform, 104; steel strike, 107, 111; steel industry, 109, 113; BL,
115, 117–121; public spending debate, 149; Education, 151, 277,
279–80, 420; IT, 271; Family Policy Group, 279; manifesto
(1983), 283; retirement plans, 420; departure, 562; education
voucher system, 591; teacher training, 598; telecommunications
reforms, 680; attitude to ERM, 691; Social Market pamphlet, 751
Jumblatt, Walid, 327
Kádár, János (Hungarian General Secretary 1956–88), 454–7
Kaifu, Toshiki (Japanese Prime Minister 1989–91), 499–501
Kano, Emir of, 525–6
Karmal, Babrak (President of Afghanistan 1979–86), 87
Kaunda, Kenneth (President Zambia 1964–91), 74, 76, 516, 520,
521–3, 530

Keating, Paul (Australian Prime Minister 1991-), 505
Keays, Sara, 310, 311
Kennedy, John F. (US President 1961–63), 517
Kenya, MT’s visit (1988), 524–5
Keyes, Bill, 113
Keynesian economics, 6, 51, 70, 123, 136
KGB, 776
Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani, Sheik, 164
Khrushchev, Nikita, 453, 456
Kiev, ‘British Days’ Exhibition, 806
King, John, Lord (Chairman British Airways 1981–93), 679
King, Tom (Environment Secretary 1983, Employment Secretary
1983–85, Northern Ireland Secretary 1985–89, Defence Secretary
1989–92): election campaign (1983), 293; Employment, 312,
420; miners’ strike (1984–5), 346, 357, 372–3, 376; Northern
Ireland Secretary, 403, 420–3; Anglo-Irish Agreement, 403, 405,
421; IRA options, 408; local government finance review, 646;
Ballygawley bomb (1988), 411; Environment, 424, 644; Defence,
756, 812; Gulf crisis, 822, 825–6, 827; leadership election
(1990), 854
Kingman Committee Report, 595
Kinnock, Glenys, 580– 1
Kinnock, Neil (Labour Leader 1983–92): election campaign (1983),
301; miners’ strike (1984–5), 359, 363, 367, 374; Labour
leadership, 360; Westland debates, 434, 435; debate on US
bombing of Libya, 448; nuclear defence policy, 568; election
campaign (1987), 580–1, 583; attack on MT (1990), 837;
speeches, 858; MT’s resignation, 858–9
Kinsley, Michael, 312
Kipling, Rudyard, 82
Kirkpatrick, Jeane (US Ambassador to UN 1981–83), 180, 232
Kissinger, Dr Henry (US National Security Adviser 1969–75,
Secretary of State 1973–77), 488
Klaus, Václav, 808
Knight, Andrew, 447
Knight, Sir Arthur, 116
Kohl, Helmut (German Chancellor 1982-): EC, 61, 312–14, 337,
537–41, 552, 554, 555–6, 557, 760–1, 763, 767; Chancellor,

257; MT’s visit (1982), 263; MT’s visits (1983), 319, 335; nuclear
policy, 323, 335, 587, 747, 774–5, 784–7; US bombing of Libya,
446; Soviet policy, 477; South African debate, 519, 534;
Chequers visit (1985), 549; CAP and German farmers, 731, 732–
3, 734, 736, 766; London visit (1988), 735; EMU discussions,
740; MT’s visit (1989), 747–8; German reunification, 759, 793–5,
796–7; Hurd meeting, 765–6; MT Frankfurt summit, 785–6;
London visit (1990), 799; achievements, 813; CSCE Paris
summit, 842–3; MT leadership question, 842–3
Kollek, Teddy, 510–11
Kosygin, Alexei (Soviet Prime Minister 1964–80), 65–6
Krenz, Egon (East German Head of State 1989–90), 793
Kryuchkov, Vladimir, 802
Kuwait, Iraqi invasion, 164, 769, 816–22
Labour Governments: Callaghan’s 3–4; Attlee’s, 5, 12, 355; incomes
policy, 42, 126; public spending plans, 51
Labour Party: philosophy, 6; attitude to trade union reform, 40;
leadership, 41; EC entry–‘renegotiation’ policy, 62; steel policies,
108, 109; SDP, 153, 265; Falklands policies, 210; Foot
leadership, 265, 298; political levy, 274, 275; manifesto drafting,
281; election (1983), 290; manifesto (1983), 290–1, 295;
election campaign (1983), 292, 296–7, 301; changes, 298; hard
Left, 339; coal nationalization, 340; miners’ strike (1984–5), 359,
360, 362, 367, 374–5; Kinnock leadership, 360; attitude to
Prevention of Terrorism Act, 415; opinion poll lead (1985), 416;
US bombing of Libya, 446; defence policy, 449, 568, 580;
opinion poll lead (1986), 560; public relations, 566; Party
Conference (1986), 566, 567, 568; election campaign (1987),
576, 579–80, 583; education testing, 595; health policy, 617;
Scottish support, 619; community charge, 661; view of Labour
Party–cont. nationalization, 676; opinion poll lead (1990), 832,
836
Lambsdorff, Count Otto von, 68, 69
Lamont, Norman (Chief Secretary 1989–90), 755, 758, 849, 854.
860
Land Rover, 118, 121, 438–9, 441
Landsbergis, Vytautas (President of Lithuania 1990–92), 801
Law, Andrew Bonar (Conservative Prime Minister 1922–23), 34
law and order: spending, 49; urban riots (1981), 143–7; policy
group, 282; increased violence, 626, 628; community charge riot
(1990), 661; see also police

Law Commission, 630
Lawley, Sue, 296
Lawson, Chris, 287
Lawson, Nigel (Energy Secretary 1981–83, Chancellor of the
Exchequer 1983–89): MTFS, 96, 151, 309, 566, 688; Energy, 151,
341; Party Conference (1981), 154; Chancellor of Exchequer,
308–9, 418, 693; public spending proposals, 316–17; EC budget,
336; miners’ strike (1984–5), 346; Chief Secretary relationship,
419–20; Westland, 425, 428; BL, 439, 440; Hong Kong
negotiations, 489–90; ERM question, 554, 566, 691, 693–700,
709–3, 722, 750; Strategy Group, 565; policy group (1986), 566;
speeches, 567; election campaign (1987), 570, 575–6; Health
review, 609, 612; broadcasting policies, 636; local government
finance, 647; community charge, 649–50, 652, 655, 667;
shadowing deutschmark, 668, 675, 690, 697, 699–705, 710, 830;
tax reforms, 672–6; relations with MT, 672, 688, 701–4, 705,
713–15, 726, 834; budget (1984), 673, 694; budgets (1985–9),
674–5, 694; gas privatization, 681; Energy Act (1983), 682;
electricity privatization, 683, 684; attitude to EMU, 691, 708;
resignation threat, 712; resignation, 715–18, 758, 834; suitability
as successor to MT, 755; Dorneywood transfer, 757
Lázár, Gyorgy, 455, 457
Leach, Admiral Sir Henry (Chief of Naval Staff and First Sea Lord
1979–82), 179, 251
Leader’s Consultative Committee, 15
leaks, 50, 52, 129–32, 138, 277, 317, 440
Lebanon: crisis (1982–3), 322, 326–8; MNF, 326–8, 334; Beirut
bombings (1983), 327–8; US intervention, 333–4; French
hostages, 730
Le Carré, John, 362
Lee, Lord, 36
Lee Kuan Yew (Singapore Prime Minister 1959–90), 74, 491, 505
Leggatt, Andrew, 102
Leigh, Edward, 855
Leigh-Pemberton, Sir Robin (Governor of the Bank of England 1983–
93), 708
Le Marchant, Spenser, 3
Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich, 475
Lennox-Boyd, Alan, Viscount Boyd of Merton, 72, 212
Lennox-Boyd, Mark (PPS to Prime Minister 1988–90), 830

Leutwiler, Fritz, 515
Levene, Sir Peter (Chief of Defence Procurement 1985–91), 424
Lever, Lord, 113
Lewin, Sir Terence (Chief of Defence Staff 1979–82), 189, 192, 193,
214
Leyland Trucks, 438, 441
Liaison Committee, 149
Liberal Party: opinion polls (1981), 153; Alliance, 264–5; policies,
265, 578; by-election performance (1982–3), 266; supporters,
298, 578; US bombing of Libya, 446; tactics, 574
Libya: London Embassy shooting, 351, 442; NUM connection, 351,
368–9; IRA links, 384, 406, 411, 413; Fiat share ownership, 431;
Abu Nidal connection, 442; US sanctions, 442; US naval action,
442; US raid, 443–9, 498, 510, 560, 564
Lilley, Peter (Trade and Industry Secretary 1990–92), 846, 849, 852,
860
Lithuania, 801, 805
Liverpool Garden Festival, 379
Lloyd George, David (Liberal Prime Minister 1916–22), 34, 36
Lloyds Merchant Bank, 431
Lloyd Webber, Sir Andrew, 580
local education authorities (LEAs), 592, 597
local government: controls, 32, 39; housing, 39, 279, 306, 563,
571, 599–601, 604–5, 671; direct labour organizations, 39;
overspending, 123; manifesto proposals (1983), 284; hard Left,
339; propaganda battle, 562; finance (1987 manifesto), 572;
education, 592, 597; finance, 642–7; GREAs, 643; rates, 644–7;
origins of community charge, 647–51; competitive tendering,
651; spending increase (1990), 658; elections (1990), 662, 664;
county councils, 663
Local Government Act (1988), 651
Local Management of Schools (LMS), 592, 593
London boroughs, 646, 650
López-Portillo, José (President of Mexico 1976–82), 169, 210, 218
Lord Mayor’s Banquet: MT’s speech (1984), 370; MT’s speech
(1990), 838
Lord’s Taverners reception (1990), 835
lottery proposals, 610n

Louis Jnr, J.J. (US Ambassador to Britain 1981–83), 331
Louvre Accord (1987), 699, 783
Lubbers, Ruud (Dutch Prime Minister 1982-): MT’s visit (1983),
318–19; CAP, 733, 735–7; Commission Presidency, 740; GATT
issues, 766; German reunification, 797; CSCE summit, 843
Luce, Richard, 179, 186, 330
Lygo, Sir Raymond, 433–4
Lynch, Jack (Irish Prime Minister 1966–73, 1977–79), 57–8
Lynk, Roy, 686
Maastricht Treaty (1991), 314, 720, 723
McAlpine, Alistair (Conservative Party Hon. Treasurer 1975–90), 37,
382, 414, 569, 841
Macfarlane, Neil, 279
McFarlane, Robert (US envoy to the Middle East 1983, National
Security Adviser 1983–85), 467
McGibbon, Mrs (working miner’s wife), 365
MacGregor, Ian (Chairman BSC 1980–83, NCB 1983–86): BSC, 114,
342; NCB, 342; pit closure plans, 343, 344; miners’ strike, 352,
354, 360–1, 363–4, 366, 377
MacGregor, John (Chief Secretary 1985–87, Agriculture Secretary
1987–89, Education Secretary 1989–90, Leader HC 1990–92):
Chief Secretary to Treasury, 420; manifesto (1987), 571–2;
Education, 596–7, 756, 758; community charge, 666; Leader of
the House, 835; leadership election campaign (1990), 846, 847–
8, 854; MT’s resignation, 856
Machel, Samora, 77, 514
Mackay, James (Lord Chancellor 1987-), 851, 857
McLean, Muriel, 383
Macmillan, Harold (Conservative Prime Minister 1957–63):
government, 13, 20; leadership style, 37, 66; Falklands advice,
188; critical of miners’ strike handling, 370; Polaris agreement,
517
McNee, Sir David (Commissioner Metropolitan Police 1977–82), 145
MacShane case, 100, 102–3, 105, 106
Maekawa, Haruo, 498
Maginnis, Ken, 406, 411
Magnox power stations, 685

Maguire, Frank, 3
Mahathir Bin Mohamad, Dr, 502, 530–1
Major, John (Chief Secretary 1987–89, Foreign Secretary 1989,
Chancellor 1989–90, Prime Minister 1990-): Whips’ Office, 422;
DHSS junior minister, 422–3; Foreign Secretary, 530, 757; Kuala
Lumpur (1989), 530–1; Health review, 609; health funding
proposals (‘top- slicing’), 612; budget (1990), 622, 675–6;
community charge, 655–6, 659–60, 664, 666; monetary policy,
690; EMU question, 716, 720–1, 724–6; Chancellor of
Exchequer, 717–19, 758; ERM approach, 719–20; ERM entry,
722–3; suitability as successor to MT, 755, 757, 831–2;
leadership election campaign (1990). 840, 844, 847, 850–4, 856,
858, 860–1; MT’s resignation, 856
Malawi, MT’s visit (1989), 527–8
Malaysia, MT’s visit (1985), 502
Manchester, HMS, 506–7
Mandela, Nelson (Vice-President ANC 1989–91 President 1991-),
514, 520, 531–4
Manifesto Committee, 571–2
Manley, Michael (Jamaican Prime Minister 1972–80, 1989–92), 76
Manpower Services Commission (MSC), 31, 421
Maritime Exclusion Zone (MEZ), 190, 209
Marjai, Jozsef, 454
Marks and Spencer, 31
Marsh, Lord, 113
Marshall, Sir Walter (Chairman, CEGB 1982–89), 358–9, 683–4,
685
Martens, Wilfried (Belgian Prime Minister 1979–81, 1981–85, 1985–
92), 241, 413–14, 729, 746
Marxism, 265, 339, 370–1, 801
Mates, Michael, 653
Maude, Angus (Paymaster General 1979–81): Cabinet post, 29;
trade union reform, 104; leaves Cabinet, 131; election campaign
(1983), 286
Maude, Francis, 851–2, 860
Maxwell, Robert, 362, 372
Mayhew, Sir Patrick (Solicitor General 1983–87, Attorney General
1987–92), 431, 434, 822

Maze Prison, 388, 389–92
Mazowiecki, Tadeusz (Polish Prime Minister 1989–90), 799
MBB, 428
Meciar, Vladimir, 808
Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS): origins and aims, 96–7;
Lawson’s role, 96, 309, 566, 688; money supply target exceeded,
125; Biffen’s views, 130; PSBR, 132, 673; £M3 problems, 694
Mercury, 680
Metal Box, 112
Metropolitan County Councils, 284, 305
Meyer, Sir Anthony, 830
Middle East, see under individual countries, also Arab-Israeli dispute,
Gulf
Millar, Ronnie, 122, 292, 382, 379, 586
Mill Hill bomb (1988), 410
Mindszenty, Cardinal, 454, 813
miners’ strike (1984–5), 344–78, see also coal industry, National
Coal Board, National Union of Mineworkers
Miners’ Wives Back to Work Campaign, 364
Minford, Professor Patrick, 138
Minimum Lending Rate (MLR), see interest rates under MONETARY
POLICY
Mitterrand, François (French President 1981-): EC, 61, 337–8, 537–
44, 546, 552, 736–7, 751, 760–1, 763, 766–7; G7, 164, 256–7,
300, 738, 754; Falklands, 182, 223, 227, 232, 548; Lebanon,
334; attitude to Libya, 442; hospitality, 476; Soviet policy, 476–
7; Moscow visit, 540, 542; Fontainebleau European Council,
541–4, 733; socialist policies, 547; MT’s relationship, 557, 730,
733, 753; French elections (1988), 731, 734; London visit
(1988), 734; MT’s visit (1988), 737; IGC deadlines, 751–2;
EBRD, 759; Franco-German axis, 790; German reunification
concerns, 793, 796–8; achievements, 813; Gulf crisis, 819; CSCE
summit (1990), 843, 845
Moi, Daniel Arap (President of Kenya 1978-), 524–5
Moiseev, Marshal Mikhail, 805
Molesworth, 243
Molotov, Vyacheslav, 483

Molyneaux, James (Leader Ulster Unionist Party 1979-), 404, 406,
857
Monde, Le, 753
monetarism, see MONETARY POLICY monetary compensation
amounts (MCAs), 336
MONETARY POLICY
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) 690–1; Lawson’s views, 554,
69, 7091, 708, 716; Delors Report, 707–8, 720–1, 723, 746, 750;
Major’s views, 719; discussions (1990), 719–21; no compromise,
724–6; EC discussions (1988), 740–2; EC discussions (1989),
759–60; EC discussions (1990), 763, 765–6
European Currency Unit (ecu), 63; ‘hard’, 720, 741, 750, 762, 765,
833
European Monetary System (EMS), 63, 554, 691
exchange controls, abolition, 44, 741
exchange rate, 93, 272, 688–90, 694, 701, 705
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM): MT’s attitude, 63, 554; German
views, 63, 83, 692; Lawson’s attitude, 554, 566, 691, 693–700,
709–13, 722; Major’s policy, 690; path to EMU, 690–1;
discussions (1979–82), 691–3; arguments (1985), 693–8;
arguments (1989), 709–14; ‘Madrid conditions’, 712–13, 718,
719, 722, 723; discussion (1990), 719–21; entry of sterling, 721–
4
interest rates: US, 165, 693; mortgages, 315, 698; influences, 673;
controlling inflation, 690; under Major, 690; MT’s attitude, 698–
9; Lawson’s attitude, 698–9, 701; nominal and real, 699n;
German, 707, 714, 814; by year (1979), 42, 53, 54
(1980), 129
(1981), 137, 148, 153- 165, 693
(1982), 271–2
(1983). 315
(1985), 694
(1986), 698–9
(1988), 702, 705, 706, 713n
(1989), 707, 713n, 714, 718, 830
(1990), 718–19, 724, 831
Lawson budgets, 672–5

monetarism, 96–7n, 123, 688–90
monetary base, 126, 133–4
money supply, 96–7, 125–6, 272, 688–90
£M3, 96, 125–6, 134, 694–6
M3, 694
M0, 694, 699, 706
sterling: strength, 42, 126, 133–4; ERM question, 63, 83; exchange
rate effects, 689; petro-currency, 692; speculative pressure, 694,
695; cost of defending, 696–7, 702; ERM entry, 721–4
Monopolies and Mergers Commission, 40, 343, 682
Moore, Charles, 840
Moore, Henry, 24, 557
Moore, Major-General Jeremy (Commander of Falklands Land
Forces), 189, 232
Moore, John (Transport Secretary 1986–87, Health and Social
Security Secretary 1987–88, Social Security Secretary 1988–89):
Transport, 563; young people policy group, 566; election
campaign (1987), 584; DHSS, 589; Health review, 608–14;
illness, 608–14, 756; DSS, 614; gas privatization, 681; leaves
Cabinet, 756, 758; leadership election campaign (1990), 840–1,
847, 849
Moore, Sir Philip, 18
Morning Star, 350, 365
Moro, Aldo, 83
Morocco, MT’s visit (1989), 526
Morrison, Sir Peter (PPS to the Prime Minister 1990), 572, 836–7,
840–1, 843–7, 856
mortgage: interest rates, 315, 698; tax relief, 600, 671, 672, 674
Mortimer, Jim, 298
Moss Side riots (1981), 144
Mount, Ferdinand, 278, 283, 288, 292
Mountbatten, Lord, 56, 57
Mozambique, 527
M3, £M3, see MONETARY POLICY
Mubarak, Hosni (President of Egypt 1981-), 509, 817
Mugabe, Robert (Prime Minister of Zimbabwe 1980-): Patriotic
Front, 72–3; Rhodesia/Zimbabwe elections, 77–8; Melbourne

CHOGM, 166; US Grenada invasion, 332; South Africa sanctions,
516, 521; MT’s visit (1989), 526–7
Muldoon, Robert (Prime Minister of New Zealand 1975–84), 166,
191, 290
Mulroney, Brian (Prime Minister of Canada 1984–93): MT’s
Canadian visit (1983), 320, 321; South Africa debate, 516–17,
521, 522, 523, 531; G7, 738, 764
Murphy, Sir Leslie, 116
Murphy, Richard, 508
Murray, Len, 107, 111
Muscat, 163–4
Museums and Galleries Improvement Fund, 633
Muzorewa, Bishop Abel, 72–3, 75, 77–8
Nagy, Imre, 454
Nakasone, Yasuhiro (Japanese Prime Minister 1982–87), 299–300,
497–9
Nally, Dermot, 395
Namibia, 78, 158, 166, 514; MT’s visit (1989), 528–9
National Armaments Directors (NADs), 427–8, 430
National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers
(NACODS), 363, 365–8, 375–6
National Bus Company, 284, 678
National Coal Board (NCB): coal dispute (1981), 139–42; pit
closure plans, 139–41, 342–3, 344, 357, 377, 686; attitudes to
industry, 340, 342; MacGregor Chairmanship, 340, 353; NUM
strike (1984–5), 344, 347, 349, 351–2, 354, 357, 360, 363–5,
369, 373–6; NACODS dispute, 363, 365–8, 375–6; electricity
privatization effects, 685
National Curriculum Council, 594
National Dock Labour Board, 355, 361
National Dock Labour Scheme (NDLS), 355–7, 669
National Economic Development Council (NEDC), 94
National Enterprise Board (NEB), 39, 115–16
National Freight Corporation, 678
National Front, 296
National Graphical Association (NGA), 98, 348
National Grid, 682–3

National Health Service (NHS): management, 47; spending, 49,
128; strike (1982), 275; finances, 277; question of reform, 571,
589; Fowler’s presentation, 581; reform, 606–17; press horror
stories, 608; review, 608–9; funding proposals, 610; structure
reform proposals, 610–11
National Insurance Contribution, 128
National Insurance Surcharge (NIS), 95, 133, 134, 271, 673
Nationality Bill, see British Nationality Bill nationalization, 6, 676
nationalized industries, 127; policy group, 282
National Reporting Centre (NRC), 347
National Rivers Authority, 682
National Union of Boilermakers (NUB), 110
National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, 382
National Union of Journalists (NUJ), 102–3
National Union of Mineworkers (NUM): dispute (1981), 140–3,
341; Scargill leadership, 339–44; overtime ban (1983), 342;
strike (1984–5), 344–78; sequestration of assets, 360, 368, 374
National Union of Teachers, 595
National Working Miners’ Committee, 365
Nationwide, 296
NATO: forces, 9; resistance to Soviet threat, 12; defence spending,
125; deployment of cruise and Pershing missiles, see cruise; MT’s
policies, 237; military balance, 237–8; intermediate-range
nuclear forces (INF), 239–43, 269–70, 322, 324, 771; Bonn
summit (1982), 258–9; arms control policy, 269; strategy
discussions, 472–3; Bruges speech, 745; Short-Range Nuclear
Forces (SNF), 771, 775, 782, 784–9, 811; Brussels summit
(1988), 774–5, 795; alternatives, 799; Eastern European NATO–
cont. membership question, 809; Anglo-American differences,
810–12
Nawala Case, 103
Neale, Gerry, 840, 841
Neave, Airey (Shadow Northern Ireland Secretary 1975–79), 22, 56,
385–6, 414
Nelson, Lord, 24, 731
Nemeth, Miklos, 809
Netherlands: cruise missiles, 241, 242–4; MT’s visit (1983), 318–
19; South African debate, 519; farming subsidies, 544; European
objectives, 556

Neubert, Michael, 840, 841
Newcastle, MT’s visit (1987), 583
New Ireland Forum, 396, 400
Newton, Tony, 603, 609, 630, 756, 855
New York Times, 197, 462
Next Steps programme, 49
NH90 helicopter, 429
Niehans, Professor Jurg, 133–4
Nigeria: oil nationalization, 74; MT’s visit (1988), 525–6; MT’s visit
(1989), 526
Nimrod Airborne Early Warning System, 424
1922 Committee, 33–4, 54, 130, 370, 435, 563, 848
Nissan, 300, 496–7
Nitze, Paul, 270
Nkomo, Joshua, 72–3, 77
NORAID, 166, 415
Northern Ireland: terrorism, 56–9, 383–4; NORAID, 166, 415;
political situation, 385–7; devolution attempts, 387–8; all-party
conference (1980), 387; hunger strikes, 388–93; Assembly
elections (1982), 394; Anglo- Irish talks, 393–402; Anglo-Irish
Agreement, 402–6, 409–10, 413, 415; Enniskillen bomb (1987),
406; extradition problems, 407; Milltown funeral, 407–8;
Ballygawley bomb (1988), 411; broadcasting ban (1988), 412;
Deal bomb (1989), 414; Gow murder (1990), 414–15
North Sea oil, 44, 63, 67n, 128, 678, 692
Nott, John (Trade Secretary 1979–81, Defence Secretary 1981–83):
Trade, 26–7, 39; trade union reform, 104; BL, 117; Defence, 131;
public spending cuts, 149; Falklands crisis, 179, 185; resignation
offer, 186; War Cabinet, 188, 214; MEZ announcement, 190;
Haig discussions, 192, 196; Falklands, 193, 201, 202, 205, 207,
208, 225, 227, 234; Defence Review, 249–51; ‘dual key’
question, 268; leaves Parliament, 424; attitude to ERM, 691–2
No Turning Back Group, 841
Novak, Michael, 627
nuclear energy, 140, 341, 640, 683–5
nuclear weapons: SALT II, 65, 245; cruise and Pershing missiles, see
cruise; Soviet TNF proposals, 159; MT’s UN speech, 236–7;
Soviet defences, 238; intermediate-range (INF), 239–44, 269–70,
321, 322, 324, 470–1, 771–2; ‘dual track’ approach, 240;

ground-launched cruise missiles (GLCM), 240, 241, 242–3;
unilateralism, 243, 265, 267–8, 290; Trident, 244–8, 267, 471;
SDI, 247, 450, 462, 463–8, 470–1, 776, 782, 818; ‘dual key’
question, 268, 332; ‘nuclear winter’, 462; anti-satellite (ASAT)
capability, 462; Anti-Ballistic Missiles (ABM), 464–5; Ballistic
Missile Defence (BMD), 464–5, 467; MAD, 465; Reykjavik
summit, 465, 470–2, 473, 482; ‘Air Breathing Systems’, 472;
Labour Party policy, 568; Aldermaston, 716; INF treaty (1987),
771, 773, 774, 784; SS20 missiles, 771; Short-Range Nuclear
Forces (SNF), 771–2, 775, 782, 784–9, 811; Follow-On to Lance
(FOTL) missiles, 772, 785, 787–8, 810; Tactical Air to Surface
Missile (TASM), 772, 810; MT’s attitude, 773; START Agreement,
773, 774–5; Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCMs), 776
Nujoma, Sam, 529
Nyerere, Julius (President of Tanzania 1964–85), 76, 77, 169–70
Obasanjo, General Olusegun, 519
O’Brien, Sir Richard, 31
Observer, 277
OD(SA) (Cabinet Committee), 188–9
Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL), 681
Official Unionist Party (OUP) now Ulster Unionist Party (UUP),
387, 394
O’Fiaich, Cardinal, 392
Ogilvy, Angus, 331
Ohira, Masayoshi (Japanese Prime Minister 1978–80), 68, 70, 71
oil: prices, 42, 54, 67, 123, 424; North Sea, 44, 63, 67n, 128, 678,
692; EC imports, 64; Nigerian nationalization, 74; Gulf crisis,
819–20, 823
Olympic Games, Moscow, 88
‘One Nation’, 8
Onslow, Sir Cranley (Chairman, 1922 Committee 1984–92), 448,
836, 840, 846, 847–9
Operation Hunger, 530
opinion polls: SDP-Liberal support (1981), 153; Falklands factor,
265; election campaign (1983), 291, 292, 297, 302, 303; Labour
lead (1985), 416; Labour lead (1986), 560; ‘caring issues’, 562;
Conservative rise, 567; fake, 574; election campaign (1987), 584,
585–6, 587; attitude to Soviet Union, 785; (1990), 832, 836
Organization of African Unity (OAU), 73

Organization of American States (OAS), 210, 229
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), 328, 330, 332
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), 67
Orgreave Coke Works picketing, 352–3, 375
Orlov, Yuri, 476
Orme, Stan, 362
Ostia cargo, 361–2
O’Sullivan, John, 572, 579
Outer Space Treaty (1967), 467
overfunding, 695, 696
Owen, David (Leader SDP 1983–90), 332, 573–4, 578
Ozal, Turgut (Turkish Prime Minister 1983–89, President 1989–93),
819, 823, 843
Paisley, Ian (Leader Democratic Unionist Party 1972-), 387, 394,
403, 404
Paisley Grammar School, 620
Pakistan, MT’s visit (1981), 167–8
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 90, 508–9, 511
Palmerston, Lord, 461, 643
Panorama, 83, 111, 209, 291, 351
Papandreou, Andreas (Greek Prime Minister 1981–89), 336–7, 545,
746–7
parents, single, 628–9
Parents’ Charter (1980), 591
Paris, Charter of, 800
Parkinson, Ann, 311
Parkinson, Cecil (Conservative Party Chairman 1981–83, Trade and
Industry Secretary 1983, Energy Secretary 1987–89, Transport
Secretary 1989–90): junior minister, 29; Cabinet reshuffle (1981),
151; Party Chairman, 152, 287; War Cabinet, 188, 214; election
manifesto (1983), 281, 283; election campaign (1983), 285,
288–9, 296, 302; Sara Keays affair, 310–11; DTI, 310, 311;
resignation, 311; abilities, 418; question of return, 419; Energy,
589; electricity privatization, 683–5; coal industry, 686; BR
privatization plans, 686; suitability as successor to MT, 755;
Transport, 765; leadership election (1990), 851
Parliamentary pay, 315

Parsons, Sir Anthony (UK Permanent Representative to UN 1979–82
and Special Adviser to the Prime Minister 1982–83): Afghanistan
invasion, 88; Falklands diplomacy, 182, 193, 202–3, 211, 218,
219–22; Belgrano sinking, 216; Security Council Resolution 505,
225; Security Council veto, 231–2
Patten, Chris (Environment Secretary 1989–90): Environment, 602,
756, 758; homelessness problem, 603; housing policy, 604, 605–
6; community charge, 656–8, 664, 666; European elections
(1989), 749; suitability as successor to MT, 755; leadership
election (1990), 853
pay: bargaining, 32–3, 97; settlements (1979), 111; TSRB, 417; see
also incomes policy
Peacock Committee, 636
Pearce, Sir Austin, 434
Peel, Sir Robert, 281
pensions, retirement, 49, 127, 315, 675
Peres, Shimon (Israeli Prime Minister 1977, 1984–86), 510–12
perestroika, 475
Perez de Cuellar, Javier (UN Secretary-General 1982–91), 210, 218,
220, 223–4, 229, 231
Perle, Richard, 449
Pershing missiles, see under cruise
Personal Equity Plans (PEPs), 673
Peter the Great, Tsar, 477
picketing, 99–100, 107–8, 345–6, 348, 351–3
Pienaar, Louis Alexander, 528
Plaza Agreement (1985), 694, 783
Pöhl, Karl Otto (President of the Bundesbank 1980–91), 708, 740–1
Poland: crisis (1981) 251–6; MT’s visit (1988), 777–82; elections
(1989), 789; border with Germany, 797, 799
Polaris, 244, 517
police: pay, 32; dealing with picketing, 100, 345–6; riots, 144–5,
147; equipment, 145; miners’ strike (1984–5), 345–6, 347–9,
352–3; increased numbers, 626; Trafalgar Square riot (1990),
661
Police Act (1964), 347
Police and Criminal Evidence Bill, 290
Policy Unit, see under Downing Street

polls, see opinion polls
poll tax, see community charge
pollution: issue, 563; atmospheric, 639
Pol Pot, 506
Ponsonby, Amanda, 715
Popieluszko, Father Jerzy, 780
Popov, Gavriil, 804–5
Portillo, Michael, 855, 856
Port Talbot Steel Works, 351
Portugal, EC membership, 545–6
Post Office, 680
poverty, 627, 646
Poverty Trap Policy Group, 282
Powell, Sir Charles (Private Secretary to the Prime Minister 1984–91):
Gorbachev visit, 461; nuclear strategy discussions, 473; Kohl
conversations, 557, 748; Deidesheim visit, 747–8; Gulf crisis,
816–17, 820; leadership election, 843–4; MT’s resignation, 856
Powell, General Colin, 827
Powell, Enoch, 184, 386, 437
Prem Chand, General, 528, 529
prescription charges, 50
Press Association, 103
Prevention of Terrorism Act, 415
Price, Charles (US Ambassador to UK 1983–89), 380
Price Commission, 33, 39
Primakov, Yevgeny, 826–7
Prime Minister’s Question Time, 41, 560, 704, 716, 833, 858
Prior, James (Employment Secretary 1979–81, Northern Ireland
Secretary 1981–84): Employment, 28, 40; trade union relations,
28, 40; public spending cuts, 54; pay talks suggestion, 94; trade
union reform plans, 98–100, 104–5, 107–8, 150, 273; steel strike,
111; criticisms, 111, 130; coal dispute, 142; Northern Ireland
Secretary, 151, 394, 396; Anglo-Irish proposals, 394; resignation,
399; GEC chairman, 431
prisons, increase in places, 626
Private Eye, 22

Private Office, see under Downing Street
privatization, 676–80; Conservative policy, 7, 672; receipts, 49;
programme, 305–6, 563, 672; utilities, 680–5; future plans, 685–
7
Privy Council, 29n
productivity, 92–3, 272, 668
Property Services Agency, 55
Prout, Sir Christopher, 749
Public Expenditure White Paper (1980–1), 52
public sector: uncontrolled, 6, 32; workforce size, 45–6; insatiable,
124
Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR), 31, 42, 50, 95, 126–
8, 673–4; arguments about, 52–5, 124, 132–6; errors in
predicting, 315–16, 699, 700
public spending, 49–56; Cabinet arguments, 123–9, 147–50; cuts or
savings (1983), 315–16; Scottish, 619–20; levels, 676
Pugo, Boris, 802
Pym, Francis (Defence Secretary 1979–81, Leader HC 1981–82,
Foreign Secretary 1982–83): Chequers lunch, 37; Defence, 123;
Leader of House, 131; government information, 131, 149;
economic forecast, 149–50; Foreign Secretary, 186–7; War
Cabinet, 188; Haig negotiations, 192, 196, 199, 200, 204, 205–8,
210–11; Falklands, 193, 214; US/Peruvian peace plan, 217, 220;
Falklands final proposals, 222, 224; Trident, 246; NATO, 249;
election campaign (1983), 293, 294; return to backbenches, 306–
7; Centre Forward, 416
Qaboos bin Said, Sultan, 163
Qatar, MT’s visit (1981), 164
QE2, 215, 228
Quayle, Dan (US Vice-President 1981–93), 782, 820
Question Time, 294
Rabin, Yitzhak (Israeli Prime Minister 1974–77, 1992-), 511
Rajk, Laszlo, 454
Rakowski, Mieczyslaw, 779
Ramphal, Sir Sonny (Commonwealth Secretary-General 1975–90),
76, 517
Rand Afrikaans University speech (1991), 599n

Rapid Deployment Force (RDF), 162
Rapier Air Defence Systems, 246
Rashid bin Said al-Maktum, Sheik, 163
rate-capping, 284, 644
rates, 644–5, 650–1
Rate Support Grant, 646
Ravenscraig steel works, 361–2, 622
Rayner, Sir Derek (Prime Minister’s Adviser on Efficiency in
Government 1979–83), 30–1
Reagan, Nancy, 160, 470, 770
Reagan, Ronald (US President 1981–89): informality, 69, 164;
election, 88, 156–7; MT’s relationship, 157–60, 165–6, 232, 324–
5, 332–3, 435, 469, 587, 774, 820; G7, 164–5, 171, 299–301,
738;
Falklands, 179–80, 201–2, 211–12, 217, 220–1, 230–2; London
visit (1982), 233, 258; Trident, 246–8; SDI, 247, 450, 462, 463–
9, 470–1, 776, 782, 818; defence policies, 249, 768; European
attitudes to, 251–2; Polish crisis, 253–5; G7 Versailles summit,
257–8; ‘Reagan Doctrine’ speech, 258; Autocue, 258; ‘dual key’
question, 268; INF negotiations, 26g-70, 470; supporters, 298;
MT’s visit (1983), 322–5; Reaganomics, 322, 739; Grenada
invasion, 330–1, 332; Westland affair, 435; British public
opinion, 437; bombing of Libya, 443–9; letter to Brezhnev, 455,
462; Geneva meeting with Gorbachev, 470; Reykjavik, 470–2;
attitude to Japan, 498; IDU, 500; South Africa sanctions, 515,
520; exchange rates, 694; MT’s visit (1987), 770–1; Irangate,
770; INF treaty (1987), 771, 774; Washington summit with
Gorbachev (1987), 774; NATO Brussels summit (1988), 775;
Moscow visit (1988), 776; London visit (1988), 776–7;
achievements, 813
recession, 51, 52, 55, 92, 119, 123, 676, 678
Red Book, 96
Redwood, John (Head of Prime Minister’s Policy Unit 1983–85),
438n
Reece, Gordon, 286–7, 658, 841
Rees, Peter (Chief Secretary 1983–85), 419–20, 649
Rees-Mogg, William, Lord, 636
Regan, Donald, 15g Regional Health Authorities (RHAs), 608n
regulation, 6, 7
RENAMO, 527–8

Renton, Tim (Chief Whip 1989–90), 835, 846, 847–8
Renwick, Sir Robin (British Ambassador to South Africa 1987–91),
522, 531
research funding, 639
reshuffles, see Cabinet
Resource Allocation Working Party (RAWP), 616
Retail Price Index (RPI), 43, 134, 654, 658, 659, 724, 831
Revenue Support Grant, 657
Reykjavik summit, 465, 470–2, 473, 482
Rhodesia, 64, 71, 72–8, 91
Ridley, Adam, 283
Ridley, Nicholas (Transport Secretary 1983–85, Environment
Secretary 1986–89, Trade and Industry Secretary 1989–90):
Foreign Office, 27, 29; Falklands discussions, 175–6; Transport,
312; miners’ strike (1984–5), 346; Environment, 563, 589, 651;
speeches, 567; election campaign (1987), 570, 571, 577, 582;
housing reforms, 571, 601, 606; painting, 632; Thyssen
Collection, 633; housing and the environment, 638; community
charge, 651–2, 653, 655–6; water privatization, 682; EMU
question, 716, 726; possible Chancellor, 717; ERM approach,
722–3; resignation, 722; suitability as successor to MT, 755; DTI,
756, 758; leadership election (1990), 851
Rifkind, Malcolm (Scottish Secretary 1986–90): Scottish Secretary,
433, 620–3; Gorbachev visit, 460; Botha visit, 514; South Africa
seminar, 515; community charge, 652, 655; leadership election
campaign (1990), 852
Right Approach, The, 14
Right Approach to the Economy, The, 14, 94
riots: urban (1981), 143–7; community charge (1990), 661
Roberts, Alfred (MT’s father), 11, 23, 37
Robilliard, Joy, 22, 858
Robinson, Derek, 116, 117
Rocard, Michel (French Prime Minister 1988–91), 738
Rogers, General Bernard (Supreme Allied Commander in Europe
1979–87), 240
Rolls-Royce, 116, 678
Romania, fall of Ceauşescu, 790
Romanov, Grigory, 453

Rome, Treaty of, 546, 547, 549–50, 554
Rome Airport terrorists, 441–2
Roosevelt, Franklin D. (US President 1933–45), 236
Rossi, Hugh, 423
Rothschild, Victor, Lord, 563, 646–7
Rover Group, 679–80, see also British Leyland Royal Academy, 633
Royal Air Force (RAF), 250
Royal Navy, 250, 251
Royal Society, 640
Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), 57–8, 397, 401, 411
Russian Orthodox Church, 478–9
Ryan, Father Patrick, 413–14, 746
Ryder, Caroline (née Stephens) 25, 297
Ryder, Richard: Downing St arrival, 24; election campaign (1983),
297; budget seminar (1990), 675; leadership election campaign
(1989), 830; leadership election campaign (1990), 850, 854, 860
Ryder Plan, 115
Ryzhkov, Nikolai (Soviet Prime Minister), 483, 802, 804, 809
Saatchi & Saatchi, 295, 570, 585
Sadat, Anwar, 508
Sakharov, Andrei, 452, 475, 480
Saltley Coke Depot picketing (1972), 112, 340, 345
SALT II, 65, 245
Salvation Army, 627
Sanderson, Russell, Lord, 623
Sands, Bobby, 391
Santer, Jacques, 552
satellite broadcasting, 635, 638
Saudi Arabia: MT’s visit (1981), 162; Gulf crisis (1990), 818, 820–2
savings ratio (1988–9), 674
Scargill, Arthur: presidency of NUM, 140, 143, 340, 341; response
to 1983 election, 339; Saltley pickets, 340; miners’ strike (1984–
5), 349–52, 354–5, 360, 363–6, 373–6; fined for contempt, 368;
Libyan connection, 351, 369

Scarman, Lord, 143, 144
Schild family, 83
Schluter, Poul (Danish Prime Minister 1982–93), 731, 740, 751
Schmidt, Helmut (German Chancellor 1979–82): visit (1979), 34–5;
EC, 61–2, 79, 83–4, 552; G7, 67–70, 165, 257; visit (1980), 83;
ERM question, 83, 692; Falklands, 191; nuclear policy, 240–2,
245, 246, 249, 258–9, 771; achievements, 813
Scholey, Bob, 112
schools, see education, grant-maintained
Schools Examination and Assessment Council, 594
science, 639–41
Scoon, Sir Paul, 330
Scotland: housing policy, 602, 621, 623; Health Boards, 608n;
Thatcherism rebuffed, 618–24; rate revaluations, 645, 647;
community charge, 651, 652, 653, 655; electricity industry, 682;
Church of, 704
Scotland Act, 36
Scottish Conservative Conferences, 35–6, 221, 291, 561–2, 576,
704
Scowcroft, General Brent, 788, 820
Seccombe, Dame Joan, 582
Selsdon Group, 154
Selsdon Man, 13
Shackleton, Lord, 175
Shah, Eddie, 348
Shakespeare, William, 106
Shamir, Yitzhak (Israeli Prime Minister 1983–84, 1986–92), 510–12
Shcherbitsky, Vladimir, 802
Sheffield, HMS, 216–17
Shelton, Bill, 830
Shenfield, Arthur, 6
Sherbourne, Stephen: election campaign (1983), 291; MT-Tebbit
meetings, 564; Strategy Group, 565; MT’s speeches, 567;
manifesto (1987), 572–3; election campaign (1987), 579, 586–7,
588
Sherman, Alfred, 133
Shevardnadze, Eduard (Soviet Foreign Minister 1985–90), 773

Shrimsley, Tony, 285, 287
Shultz, George (US Secretary of State 1982–89), 256, 333, 461, 468,
473, 783
Sidewinder missiles, 226, 227
Sihanouk, Prince, 506
Sikorsky, 426–31, 436
Silkin, John, 296
Silkin, Sam, 98
Singapore, MT’s visit (1985), 504–5
Single European Act, 555–7, 558, 741
Sinn Fein, 394–5, 397, 401, 406, 408, 412
Sir Galahad, 233
Sirs, Bill, 103, 109, 111–12
Sir Tristram, 233
Skinner, Dennis, 859
SLADE, 98, 102
Smith, Adam, 291, 618
Smith, Hector, 111
Smith, Ian, 72
Soames, Christopher, Lord (Leader HL 1979–81), 27, 77–8, 79, 151
Soames, Mary, 78
Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), 387, 391, 394–5, 400,
403–4, 410
Social Democratic Party (SDP), 153, 264–5, 274, 298, 573–4
socialism: democratic, 6–7; debilitating effects, 9; appearance and
reality, 12; Labour Party, 265, 566; ingrained, 306; failure, 625;
reversal of, 687; Poland, 779
Socialist Workers Party, 293
social security benefits, 49, 55, 127
society, ‘no such thing’, 626
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), 119
Soeharto, Thojib N.J., 503
SOGAT, 113
Solidarity, 156, 252, 777–82, 789
Solzhenitzyn, Alexander, 290, 452, 813

South Africa: political issue, 78, 91, 487, 512–13; British
relationship, 160, 512–13; sporting relations, 166; sanctions,
166, 515–16, 517–19, 532, 534; Commonwealth relations, 502–
3, 512, 516–19, 520–4, 530–1; Botha’s Chequers visit, 514–15;
debt repayment freeze, 515; Chequers seminar, 515–16; ‘Eminent
Persons Group’, 518–19; changes, 522, 531–2; Namibia, 528–9;
leadership, 529; MT’s visit, 533
Southall riots (1981), 143–4
Southern Thule, 176
South Georgia, 174, 177, 179, 196, 201, 204–5, 208–9, 219
South Sandwich Islands, 174, 176
South-West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), 529
Sovietologists, 451, 474
Soviet Union: growing threat, 9; Iron Lady title, 65; Kosygin
discussions, 65–6; Afghanistan invasion, 65, 69, 87–8; military
spending, 238; nuclear capability, 239; Brezhnev’s arms
reduction proposals, 242; West Siberian Gas Pipeline, 253–6;
South Korean Airliner, 321, 322, 324, 450; US arms talks, 323–4,
453, 461, see also SALT; NUM support, 369; East-West relations,
450–3, 769; refuseniks, 460, 476, 484, 510; GALOSH, 465;
Gorbachev leadership, 469–70, 768; Reykjavik, 470–2;
perestroika, 475, 773, 803–4; MT’s visit (1987), 478–85; Baltic
States, 767, 801; reforms, 768–9, 790, 800–1; INF treaty (1987),
771, 773, 774, 784; Reagan’s visit (1988), 776; German
reunification, 790, 792, 798; MT’s visit (1989), 792; political
situation (1989–90), 800–4; MT’s visit (1990), 804–7; Gulf crisis,
819, 826–7; see also Brezhnev, Gorbachev
Spain: US bombing of Libya, 446; EC membership, 545–6;
economy, 668; Gibraltar discussions, 746
Special Air Service (SAS), 90, 205, 222
Special Boat Service, 222
Speed, Keith, 190, 250
Spicer, Michael, 285, 604, 605
Sri Lanka, MT’s visit (1985), 503–4
Stalin, Joseph, 459, 475, 483, 801
Stalker-Sampson Report, 409
START Agreement, 773, 774–5, 776
statism, 6–7
Steel, David (Leader Liberal Party 1976–88), 222, 573–4, 578
steel strike (1980), 108–14

Stepping Stones group, 42
sterling, see MONETARY POLICY
Stevas, Norman St John (Leader HC 1979–81), 130, 446–7
Stewart, Ian, 515
Stock Exchange, 311
Stock Market collapse (1987), 700, 710
Stormont, 386
Stowe, Sir Kenneth (Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
1975–9, Permanent Secretary NIO 1979–81, then DHSS 1981–87),
18, 25
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, see SALT
Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI), 247, 450, 462, 463–71, 776, 782,
818
Strategy Group, 565–6
Streator, Ed, 192
strikes: effects on PSBR, 53; steel, 54, 104–7; supplementary
benefit, 55; problem, 92; engineering industry (1979), 98, 101;
steel (1980), 108–14; civil service, 139; public sector, 274–5;
NHS (1982), 275; water (1982), 275; miners (1984–5), 306,
344–78; coal (1926–7), 340; miners (1973–4), 340; dock (1984),
355–7, 361–2; reduction, 669
student loans, 598
Suez (1956), 8, 173, 437
Sukarno, Achmad, 8
Sunday Telegraph, 596, 840
Sunday Times, 132, 368, 840
Sununu, John (US Chief of Staff 1989–91), 820
supplementary benefit, 55
‘supply side’ reforms, 669, 672
Suzuki, Zenko (Japanese Prime Minister 1980–82), 232
Syria: Lebanon policy, 326–7, 334; El Al Heathrow bomb, 510; Gulf
crisis, 823–4
Takeshita, Noboru (Japanese Prime Minister 1987–89), 499
Tamworth manifesto, 281
Taraki, Nur Muhammed, 87
Tax and Price Index (TPI), 43n

taxation: government approaches, 6, 7; Conservative policies, 7;
VAT increases (1979), 42–3, (1991), 667; income tax cuts
(1979), 43, (1986), 673, (1988), 673; tax allowances, 43; income
tax policy, 136, 271, 570; husband and wife, 279, 570; Labour’s
manifesto (1987), 579; mortgage tax relief, 600, 671, 672, 674;
hypothecated (NHS), 610; private health insurance tax relief
proposals, 610, 612–13; child care tax relief proposals, 630–1;
local government finance proposals, 648–9; reform, 672;
Lawson’s reforms, 672–5; see also VAT
teacher training, 597–8, see also education
Tebbit, Margaret, 383, 422, 587, 755, 835
Tebbit, Norman (Employment Secretary 1981–83, Trade and Industry
Secretary 1983–85, Party Chairman 1985–87): junior minister, 29;
BL, 120, 437, 440; Industry, 131; Employment, 151, 152; trade
union reform, 272–4; Family Policy Group, 279; manifesto
(1983), 283; election campaign (1983), 288, 293; DTI, 312;
miners’ strike (1984–5), 346; dock strike (1984), 361; Party
Conference (1984), 379; Brighton bomb (1984), 381, 383;
abilities, 418; Conservative Party Chairman, 421–2; Westland,
425–6, 428; press criticism, 564; Strategy Group, 565;
Bournemouth Party Conference, 567; election Tebbit, Norman–
cont. campaign (1987), 569–70, 572, 574–5, 581, 584, 585, 587;
opinion of Alliance, 573–4; departure plans, 587; leaves Cabinet,
589; quoted, 670; suitability as successor to MT, 755; views on
single currency, 833; refuses Cabinet position, 835; leadership
election campaign (1990), 840, 846, 847, 849–50, 855; MT’s
resignation, 856
technology: impact on employment, 257; information (IT), 271
Telecommunications Bill, 290
television, handling, 286–7; see also BBC, broadcasting, Channel 4,
ITV
Territorial Army, 250
Thailand, MT’s visit (1985), 506
Thatcher, Carol, 24, 37, 71, 285, 414, 841
Thatcher, Denis: Commons confidence debate (1979), 3, 4; election
victory (1979), 17, 18–19; Downing Street, 21; character sketch,
22–3; birthday (1979), 34; Chequers lunch (1979), 37; oil
industry expertise, 65; US visit (1981), 160; Parkinson plaque,
311; Brighton bomb (1984), 380, 381; Harrods bomb (1983),
397; Gorbachev visit (1984), 461; Edinburgh Commonwealth
Games visit, 520–1; African visits, 524–6, 528; election campaign
(1987), 583, 588; golf with Bush, 810; Lord’s Taverners, 835;
leadership election campaign (1990), 841, 845, 846; MT’s

resignation, 856, 858, 860–2
Thatcher, Mark, 37, 700, 841, 861
Thatcherism, 13, 561, 572, 579, 599, 618–24; ‘Social Thatcherism’,
147
Think-Tank, see Central Policy Review Staff Thomas, George, 34
Thomas, Harvey, 285–6, 468, 580
Thomas, Vera, 36
Thompson, Brigadier Julian, 189
Thorn, Gaston (Luxemburg Prime Minister 1974–79, President
European Commission 1981–85), 538, 542
Thorneycroft, Peter, Lord (Party Chairman 1979–81), 37, 104, 149–
50, 152
Thyssen Collection, 633–4
Tiananmen Square massacre (1989), 494
Tickell, Sir Crispin, 170, 640
Tilney, Sir John and Lady, 37
Time, 159
Times, The, 82, 105, 138, 152, 186, 277, 282, 311, 778, 841
Tito, Marshal, 88, 161
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 485
Today programme, 586
Top Salary Review Board (TSRB), 417
top-slicing, see health Total Exclusion Zone (TEZ), 209, 212
Townend, John, 855
Toxteth riots (1981), 144, 145–6
Trade Disputes Act (1906), 102
Trade Union and Labour Relations Act (1974), 273
trade unions: legislation, 8, 97–108, 272–3, 279, 669; Prior’s
relationship, 28; reform programme, 39, 40, 97–108, 150, 272–
6, 284, 306, 572, 669; political levy, 274, 275–6; hard Left, 306,
339
Trades Union Congress (TUC): Heath government proposals, 7;
trade union reform attitude, 99–100; political levy question, 276;
miners’ strike (1984–5), 363, 372–3, 375–6; Delors address, 742
Trafford, Tony, 383
training: importance, 5; MSC, 31; teacher, 597–8; vouchers, 670,
831

Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs), 670
Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU), 108–9, 355–7,
361–2
transport (urban) policy group, 282
Trident, 244–8, 267, 471, 472–3
Trollope, Anthony, 37
Trudeau, Pierre (Canadian Prime Minister 1968–79, 1980–84), 164,
169, 170, 300, 320–2, 453
Truman Doctrine, 481
Tsukuba Science City, 497
Turkey, Gulf crisis, 819, 823
Turnbull, Andrew (Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
1988–92), 717, 856
Ukraine: status, 801–2; MT’s visit (1990), 806–7
Ulster, use of term, 385, see also Northern Ireland
Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR), 57, 401
underclass, 627, 661
unemployment: (1950s), 7; (1979), 52; cost, 123; (1981), 148, 153;
(1982), 272; policy group, 282; election campaign (1983), 292;
(1983), 315; (1986), 567; election campaign (1987), 583;
Scottish, 618; (1987), 618–19; council estate culture, 671;
(1988), 706
Union of Democratic Miners (UDM), 686
Unipart, 438, 439, 440
United Arab Emirates (UAE), 163
United Nations (UN): Iran hostages, 87; self-determination
principle, 174, 195; Falklands issue, 182–3, 211, 216, 821;
Security Council Resolution 502, 182, 193, 203, 209, 210, 213,
226; Security Council Resolution 505, 225–6; Falklands ceasefire Resolution veto, 231–2; disarmament session, 236, 267;
Grenada, 329; Security Council Resolution 242, 509; Namibia,
528; Gulf crisis, 818, 821, 827–8; Security Council Resolution
661, 821; Security Council Resolution 665, 823; UN Children’s
Summit, 826
United States of America: economy, 7, 322, 693, 739, 782; Suez, 8,
437; Vietnam, 9; Irish-Americans, 58, 166, 384, 415; Iran
hostages, 69, 86–8, 156, 825; MT’s visit (1979), 86–7; MT’s visit
(1981), 158–60; interest rates, 165, 693; Argentina relations,
176–7, 179–80, 188, 323; Falklands crisis, 180, 187–8, 212;

Falklands war, 226, 227, 229; NATO, 237–42, 810–12; Trident,
244–8, 267; Polish crisis, 253–6; ‘dual key’ question, 268, 332;
MT’s visit (1983), 320, 322–5; Soviet arms talks, 323–4, 453,
461, see also SALT; Lebanon MNF, 326–8, 334; Grenada invasion,
328–32, 334–5; Lebanon retaliation, 333–4; Westland affair,
436–7; Libya sanctions, 442; raid on Libya, 443–9, 498, 510;
National Security Council, 461; MT’s visit (1984), 466–8; MT’s
visit (1985), 468–9; MT’s visit (1986), 472–3; Arab-Israeli
dispute, 507–8; South Africa sanctions, 515, 520; European
policies, 768, 783–4, 789, 794–5, 798–9; MT’s visit (1987), 770–
2; INF treaty (1987), 771, 773, 774, 784; SNF negotiations, 788;
MT’s visit (1989), 794; Gulf crisis, 816–28; see also Bush, Reagan
universities, 598–9, 639, see also education
Uno, Sousuke (Japanese Prime Minister 1989), 499
U-turn, 122
van Agt, Andries (Dutch Prime Minister 1977–82), 81, 241, 242–3
Van Den Broek, Hans, 319, 736
Van der Post, Laurens, 186, 521
Varley-Marshall assurances, 438, 679
VAT: increase (1979), 42–3; EC discussions, 313, 538, 544, 557,
728; increase (1991), 667
Vickers, 825
Victoria Dam Power Station, Sri Lanka, 75, 503, 506
Victorian values, 627
Vienna Airport terrorists, 441–2
Vietnam: War, 9; boat people, 64, 66
Viljoen, Gerrit, 531
Villiers, Sir Charles (Chairman BSC 1976–80), no, 112, 113–14
Volkswagen, 679
voluntary organizations, 603, 627
Vulcan bombers, 239
Waddington, David (Chief Whip 1987–89, Home Secretary 1989-go),
757, 854–5
Wakeham, Alison (née Ward), 25, 285
Wakeham, John (Chief Whip 1982–87, Leader HC 1987–89, Energy
Secretary 1989–90): junior minister, 29; Chief Whip, 310–11;
Brighton bomb (1984), 382, 383; Cabinet reshuffle (1985), 418,

419; Westland, 430; Strategy Group, 565; election campaign
(1987), 583; electricity privatization, 683; nuclear power policy,
685; coal industry, 686; Gulf crisis, 822; Howe’s resignation
(1990), 835; leadership election campaign (1990), 841, 846,
847, 850, 851, 853–5; MT’s resignation, 856
Wakeham, Roberta, 381
Waldegrave, William (Health Secretary 1990–92): community
charge, 563, 646, 647, 649; Gulf crisis, 822; Health, 835; MT
leadership question, 853
Waiden, Brian, 54, 105, 125, 293, 832
Waldheim, Kurt (UN Secretary General 1972–81, Austrian President
1986–92), 160
Wales, housing policy, 602
Walesa, Lech (Chairman Solidarity 1980–90, then President of Poland
1990-), 778, 780–1
Walker, Peter (Agriculture Secretary 1979–83, Energy Secretary
1983–87, Welsh Secretary 1987–90): Agriculture Minister, 28,
341; Energy, 341–2; miners’ strike (1984–5), 345, 346–7, 353–4,
357–8, 362, 364, 366, 370, 372–3, 376; Party Conference
(1984), 368; Cabinet position, 418; BL, 440; housing schemes,
602–3; gas privatization, 681; electricity privatization, 683, 684
Wall Street Journal, 449
Walpole, Sir Robert, 24
Walters, Sir Alan: monetary policy, 97n, 126, 133–6, 696, 707,
713–14; advice to Lawson, 317; Hong Kong currency crisis, 489–
90; nuclear power stations advice, 685; ERM question, 692, 693,
694, 695, 700, 709, 722; Lawson’s attitude, 715–17, 718;
currency proposals, 725
Walters, General Vernon, 192, 445–6
Warry, Peter, 438n
Warsaw Pact, 237–8, 252, 454, 472, 800, 809, 810
Wass, Sir Douglas (Permanent Secretary Treasury 1974–83, Joint
Head of Home Civil Service 1981–83), 136
water: pollution, 638–9; privatization, 682
Weekend World, 54, 105, 131, 293
Weinberger, Caspar (US Defence Secretary 1981–87), 188, 226, 227,
247–8, 449, 473
welfare benefits, effects, 8
Wellington, 1st Duke, 24
Welsh Nationalists, 289

Welt, Die, 84
Western European Union (WEU), 745, 809
Westland affair, 419, 423–37, 440, 560, 564
West Siberian Gas Pipeline, 253–6
wets, 50–1, 52, 54, 104, 123–4, 126, 128, 129, 149, 153–5;
definition of term, 51n
Whitehall, 6, 619
Whitelaw, William (Home Secretary 1979–83, Leader HL 1983–88):
relationship with MT 4, 25, 27; Home Secretary, 27; QL, 33;
Iranian embassy siege, 89–90; trade union reform, 107; coal
dispute, 143; urban riots, 143–5; public spending debate, 149;
Cabinet reshuffle, 151; Falklands, 185, 207; War Cabinet, 188,
214; Family Policy Group, 279; election campaign (1983), 288;
Leader of Lords, 307; Parkinson affair, 311; Grenada, 330;
miners’ strike (1984–5), 346, 376; MT holiday communications,
362; Brighton bomb (1984), 381; Cabinet reshuffle (1985), 418,
419; Westland, 428; BL, 440; Gorbachev visit, 460; Strategy
Group, 565; election campaign (1987), 572; opposition to
Forsyth, 623; BBC policy, 636; illness and resignation, 757;
leadership election campaign (1990), 848
Whitmore, Clive, 48, 192, 205
Whittingdale, John, 285, 586, 792, 841, 843
Wicks, Sir Nigel (Prime Minister’s Principal Private Secretary 1985–
88, Second Permanent Secretary, Treasury 1989-), 433, 525
Wilkie, David, 371
Williams, Shirley, 153, 298
Williamson, David, 729
Willis, Norman, 372, 376
Wilson, Gordon, 406
Wilson, Harold (Labour Prime Minister 1964–70, 1974–76), 8, 13n,
30n, 162
Wilson, Marie, 406
Wimpey, 457
Windsor, Roger, 36g Winston Churchill Foundation speech, 325
Winston Churchill Memorial Lecture, 79
winter of discontent, 4, 8, 19
Woerner, Manfred, 810

Wolfson, David: Downing St arrival, 24; Chequers lunch, 37; civil
service dinner, 48; PSBR discussions, 135; Cabinet reshuffle
(September 1981), 152; election campaign (1983), 288, 293;
Brighton bomb (1984), 380; election campaign (1987), 584;
health policy, 617
Wolfson Foundation, 633
Woodhouse School, Finchley, 225
Woodward, Rear Admiral John ‘Sandy’, 189, 214
World Bank, 169, 170, 526–7
World Climate Conference, Geneva (1990), 836
World War, First, 5
World War, Second, 5, 11, 461
Wyatt, Woodrow, Lord, 370
Yakovlev, Alexander, 460, 772–3
Yazov, Marshal Dmitri, 805–6
Yeltsin, Boris (President of Russia 1991-), 773, 803–4
York, HMS, 816
York, MT’s visit (1984), 365
Young, David, Lord (Minister without portfolio 1984–85, Employment
Secretary 1985–87, Trade and Industry Secretary 1987–89):
Employment, 28, 420–1; DTI, 28, 505; speeches, 567; advice,
569; manifesto (1987), 572–3; election campaign (1987), 583,
584–5; broadcasting policies, 636; BAe Rover deal, 680; leaves
Cabinet, 756
Young, Janet, Lady (Leader HL 1981–83)151–2, 279, 307
Younger, George (Scottish Secretary 1979–86, Defence Secretary
1986–89): Scottish Secretary, 347, 433, 620; miners’ strike
(1984–5), 347; IRA report, 405; Nimrod cancellation, 424;
Defence, 433; US bombing of Libya, 443, 445; election campaign
(1987), 578; opposition to Forsyth, 623; rate revaluation, 647;
departure, 756; leadership election campaign (1989), 830, 837;
leadership election campaign (1990), 840, 841
young people: policy group, 565–6; homelessness, 603, 627;
juvenile delinquency, 626–7; teenage pregnancy, 627
Youth Opportunities Programme, 55n, 128
Youth Training Scheme, 279
Zaid bin Sultan al Nahayyan, Sheik, 163

Zamyatin, Leonid, 460
Zhao Ziyang, 260–1, 488, 489, 490, 492, 493
Zhelev, Zhelyu (President of Bulgaria 1990-), 843
Zia Ul-Haq, Mohammed, 167
Zimbabwe: independence, 73, 78, 523; MT’s visit (1989), 526–7
25 de mayo, 212, 214, 228

Acknowledgements

Many people assisted me in one way or another with the preparation of this
book. Some I cannot name for they are still members of the civil service;
others I can and do mention in what follows. But there is one person to whom
I owe special thanks.
Government officials who prepare the ground for summit meetings are
known in the trade as ‘sherpas’ after the Himalayan guides who assist people
to climb Everest. My indispensable sherpa in the enterprise of writing this
book has been Robin Harris. Robin has descended into the ravines of research
for official papers to confirm or challenge my memory; he was a sure-footed
guide through blizzards of fact and interpretation; and he ensured that the
expedition reached its destination by the most direct route, in good order, and
even attired with some elegance. Without his advice and help at every stage, I
doubt that we could have reached the summit.
We were not alone on the journey. John O’Sullivan came skiing in
occasionally, tuned up the arguments, pared the prose and pushed forward
the narrative. Without him this book would have taken longer to write and it
would take longer to read.
Another vital member of the team was Chris Collins, our researcher. He was
meticulous, assiduous and totally committed; and to these qualities he added
the valuable objectivity of the academic historian. Debbie Fletcher typed —
and then retyped and typed again — the constantly evolving manuscript with
impressive efficiency and unfailing cheerfulness. Tessa Gaisman brought her
own special blend of good taste and common sense to the selection of the
photographs. Carolyn Selman helped us sort press releases and press cuttings
into manageable order. I am immensely grateful to all members of my
memoirs team. Our work together has been — to borrow a phrase which
appears later in this volume — ‘fraught but fun’.
One of the more enjoyable aspects of memoir writing is the reliving of old
times with good friends. I was able to draw on the recollections and
reflections of many of those who, in different ways, were involved with the
story I have told. I would like to express my special thanks to Cynthia
Crawford, Sir Charles Powell, Sir Alan Walters and John Whittingdale MP, all
of whose assistance was invaluable. I also had the benefit of advice on
particular topics from Professor Tim Congdon, Andrew Dunlop, Lord Griffiths
of Fforestfach, George Guise, Rt. Hon. the Hon. Archie Hamilton MP, Sir John
Hoskyns, Sir Bernard Ingham, Dr Sheila Lawlor, John Mills, Rt. Hon. Sir Peter
Morrison, Ferdinand Mount, Lord Parkinson of Carnforth, Caroline Ryder,
Stephen Sherbourne, Sir Kenneth Stowe, Lady Wakeham and Lord Wolfson of
Sunningdale.
Leafing through the official papers, I found them fascinating but limited:
indeed, their very dryness confirmed in my mind the value of writing this
book. Some stories you have to live in order to tell. But, that said, I, who
never kept a diary, would have been lost without them. I am, therefore, very
obliged to Sir Robin Butler and the staff of the Cabinet Office for the kind and
efficient way in which they made the records of my administration available
to me.
My publishers, HarperCollins, acted as publishers should — allowing the
author to do her stuff but keeping her up to the mark and within the deadline.

Eddie Bell was a reassuring and shrewd source of practical guidance. Stuart
Proffitt worked tenaciously to ensure that jargon was removed and obscurity
illumined. I am grateful to them both.
Finally, I would like to thank Julian Seymour who runs my office: without
him and the members of my staff this story could not have been told.
MARGARET THATCHER

June 1993

Copyright
A hardcover edition of this book was published in 1993 by HarperCollins Publishers.
THE DOWNING STREET YEARS.

Copyright © 1993 by Margaret Thatcher.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this
text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or
stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form
or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
EPub Edition © JULY 2010 ISBN: 978-0-062-02910-2
First HarperPerennial edition published 1995.
ISBN 0-06-092563-9
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOC CARD NUMBER

93-239539

95 96 97 98 99 HC 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East – 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1 Auckland,
New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

